AMATH 301 Beginning Scientific Computing (4) NW
Introduction to the use of computers to solve problems arising in the physical, biological, and engineering sciences. Application of mathematical judgment, programming architecture, and flow control in solving scientific problems. Introduction to MATLAB routines for numerical programming, computation, and visualization. Prerequisite: either MATH 125, Q SCI 292, or MATH 135. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 301

AMATH 351 Introduction to Differential Equations and Applications (3) NW
Introductory survey of ordinary differential equations; linear and nonlinear equations; Taylor series; and. Laplace transforms. Emphasizes on formulation, solution, and interpretation of results. Examples drawn from physical and biological sciences and engineering. Prerequisite: MATH 125. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 351

AMATH 352 Applied Linear Algebra and Numerical Analysis (3) NW
Analysis and application of numerical methods and algorithms to problems in the applied sciences and engineering. Applied linear algebra, including eigenvalue problems. Emphasis on use of conceptual methods in engineering, mathematics, and science. Extensive use of MATLAB package for programming and solution techniques. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or Q SCI 293. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 352

AMATH 353 Fourier Analysis and Partial Differential Equations (3) NW
Heat equation, wave equation, and Laplace's equation. Separation of variables. Fourier series in context of solving heat equation. Fourier sine and cosine series; complete Fourier series. Fourier and Laplace transforms. Solution of partial differential equations on infinite domains. D' Alembert's solution for wave equation. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 353

AMATH 383 Introduction to Continuous Mathematical Modeling (3) NW
Introductory survey of applied mathematics with emphasis on modeling of physical and biological problems in terms of differential equations. Formulation, solution, and interpretation of the results. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 383

AMATH 401 Vector Calculus and Complex Variables (4) NW
Emphasizes acquisition of solution techniques; illustrates ideas with specific example problems arising in science and engineering. Includes applications of vector differential calculus, complex variables; line-surface integrals; integral theorems; and Taylor and Laurent series, and contour integration. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 401

AMATH 402 Introduction to Dynamical Systems and Chaos (4) NW
Overview methods describing qualitative behavior of solutions on nonlinear differential equations. Phase space analysis of fixed pointed and periodic orbits. Bifurcation methods. Description of strange attractors and chaos. Introductions to maps. Applications: engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 402

AMATH 403 Methods for Partial Differential Equations (4) NW
Applications of partial differential equations; linear and quasilinear first order equations, characteristics, shocks; classification of linear second order equations; basic solution techniques for parabolic, elliptic, and hyperbolic equations; Green's functions and integral transform methods. Prerequisite: AMATH 401; either AMATH 351 or MATH 307. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 403

AMATH 422 Computational Modeling of Biological Systems (3) NW
Examines fundamental models that arise in biology and their analysis through modern scientific computing. Covers discrete and continuous-time dynamics, in deterministic and stochastic settings, with application from molecular biology to neuroscience to population dynamics; statistical analysis of experimental data; and MATLAB programming from scratch. Prerequisite: either MATH 307 or AMATH 351. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 422

AMATH 423 Mathematical Analysis in Biology and Medicine (3) NW
Focuses on developing and analyzing mechanistic, dynamic models of biological systems and processes, to better understand their behavior and function. Applications drawn from many branches of biology and medicine. Provides experiences in applying differential equations, difference equations, and dynamical systems theory to biological problems. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307, MATH/STAT 390. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 423

AMATH 481 Scientific Computing (5)
Project-oriented computational approach to solving problems arising in the physical/engineering sciences, finance/economics, medical, social, and biological sciences. Problems requiring use of advanced MATLAB routines and toolboxes. Covers graphical techniques for data presentation and communication of scientific results. Prerequisite: AMATH 301; either AMATH 351 or MATH 307; either AMATH 352 or MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 481

AMATH 482 Computational Methods for Data Analysis (5)
Exploratory and objective data analysis methods applied to the physical, engineering, and biological sciences. Brief review of statistical methods and their computational implementation for studying time series analysis, spectral analysis, filtering methods, principal component analysis, orthogonal mode decomposition, and image processing and compression. Prerequisite: AMATH 301; either AMATH 352 or MATH 308. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 482

AMATH 483 High-Performance Scientific Computing (5)
Introduction to hardware, software, and programming for large-scale scientific computing. Overview of multicore, cluster, and supercomputer architectures; procedure and object oriented languages; parallel computing paradigms and languages; graphics and visualization of large data sets; validation and verification; and scientific software development. Prerequisite: either CSE 142 or AMATH 301. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 483

AMATH 490 Special Topics (1-5, max. 15)
Topics of current interest in applied mathematics not covered by other undergraduate courses.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 490

AMATH 498 Senior Project or Thesis (1-6, max. 6)
Intended for Honors students and other advanced undergraduates completing a special project or senior thesis in applied mathematics. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 498

AMATH 499 Undergraduate Reading and Research (1-6, max. 6)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 499

AMATH 500 Special Studies in Applied Mathematics (*, max. 24)
Lectures and discussions of topics of current interest in applied mathematics. May not be offered every quarter; content may vary from one offering to another. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 500

AMATH 501 Vector Calculus and Complex Variables (5)
Emphasizes acquisition of solution techniques; illustrates ideas with specific example problems arising in science and engineering. Includes applications of vector differential calculus, complex variables; line-surface integrals; integral theorems; and Taylor and Laurent series, and contour integration. Prerequisite: either a course in vector calculus or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 501

AMATH 502 Introduction to Dynamical Systems and Chaos (5)
Overview methods describing qualitative behavior of solutions on nonlinear differential equations. Phase space analysis of fixed pointed and periodic orbits. Bifurcation methods. Description of strange attractors and chaos. Introductions to maps. Applications: engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology. Prerequisite: either a course in differential equations or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 502

AMATH 503 Methods for Partial Differential Equations (5)
Applications of partial differential equations; linear and quasilinear first order equations, characteristics, shocks; classification of linear second order equations; basic solution techniques for parabolic, elliptic, and hyperbolic equations; Green's functions and integral transform methods. Prerequisite: either AMATH 501 and a course in differential equations or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 503

AMATH 504 Mathematical Epidemiology (5)
Focuses on the construction and analysis of mathematical models for infectious disease transmission and control. Emphasizes evaluation and comparison of vaccination programs. Applications are presented for a variety of diseases such as measles, rubella, smallpox, rabies, etc. Prerequisite: either a course in differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 504

AMATH 505 Introduction to Fluid Dynamics (4)
Eulerian equations for mass-motion; Navier-Stokes equation for viscous fluids, Cartesion tensors, stress-strain relations; Kelvin's theorem, vortex dynamics; potential flows, flows with high-low Reynolds numbers; boundary layers, introduction to singular perturbation techniques; water waves; linear instability theory. Prerequisite: either a course in partial differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ATM S 505/OCEAN 511; A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 505

AMATH 506 Applied Probability and Statistics (4)
Discrete and continuous random variables, independence and conditional probability, central limit theorem, elementary statistical estimation and inference, linear regression. Emphasis on physical applications. Prerequisite: some advanced calculus and linear algebra. Offered: jointly with STAT 506.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 506

AMATH 507 Calculus of Variations (5)
Necessary and sufficient conditions for a weak and strong extremum. Legendre transformation, Hamiltonian systems. Constraints and Lagrange multipliers. Space-time problems with examples from elasticity, electromagnetics, and fluid mechanics. Sturm-Liouville problems. Approximate methods. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307; MATH 324; MATH 327. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 507

AMATH 509 Theory of Optimal Control (3)
Trajectories from ordinary differential equations with control variables. Controllability, optimality, maximum principle. Relaxation and existence of solutions. Techniques of nonsmooth analysis. Prerequisite: real analysis on the level of MATH 426; background in optimization corresponding to MATH 515. Offered: jointly with MATH 509.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 509

AMATH 512 Methods of Engineering Analysis (3)
Applications of mathematics to problems in chemical engineering; vector calculus; properties and methods of solution of first and second order partial differential equations; similarity transforms, separation of variables, Laplace and Fourier transforms. Prerequisite: MATH 308, MATH 307 or AMATH 351, MATH 324, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 512; A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 512

AMATH 514 Networks and Combinatorial Optimization (3)
Mathematical foundations of combinatorial and network optimization with an emphasis on structure and algorithms with proofs. Topics include combinatorial and geometric methods for optimization of network flows, matching, traveling salesmen problem, cuts, and stable sets on graphs. Special emphasis on connections to linear and integer programming, duality theory, total unimodularity, and matroids. Prerequisite: either MATH 308 or AMATH 352 any additional 400-level mathematics course. Offered: jointly with MATH 514.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 514

AMATH 515 Fundamentals of Optimization (5)
Maximization and minimization of functions of finitely many variables subject to constraints. Basic problem types and examples of applications; linear, convex, smooth, and nonsmooth programming. Optimality conditions. Saddlepoints and dual problems. Penalties, decomposition. Overview of computational approaches. Prerequisite: linear algebra and advanced calculus. Offered: jointly with IND E 515/MATH 515.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 515

AMATH 516 Numerical Optimization (3)
Methods of solving optimization problems in finitely many variables, with or without constraints. Steepest descent, quasi-Newton methods. Quadratic programming and complementarity. Exact penalty methods, multiplier methods. Sequential quadratic programming. Cutting planes and nonsmooth optimization. Prerequisite: MATH 515. Offered: jointly with MATH 516.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 516

AMATH 521 Special Topics in Mathematical Biology (5, max. 15)
Special topics in mathematical biology. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 521

AMATH 522 Introduction to Mathematical Biology (5)
Modeling biological systems with differential and difference equations. Examples from: ecology (population growth, disease dynamics); biochemistry and cell biology; and neurobiology (Hodgkin-Huxley and neural networks). Methods include linear stability analyses, phase-plane analyses, and perturbation theory. Prerequisite: either a course in differential equations or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 522

AMATH 523 Mathematical Analysis in Biology and Medicine (5)
Focuses on developing and analyzing mechanistic, dynamic models of biological systems and processes, to better understand their behavior and function. Applications drawn from many branches of biology and medicine. Provides experiences in applying differential equations, difference equations, and dynamical systems theory to biological problems. Prerequisite: either courses in differential equations and statistics and probability, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 523

AMATH 524 Mathematical Biology: Spatiotemporal Models (5)
Examines partial differential equations for biological dynamics in space and time. Draws examples from molecular and cell biology, ecology, epidemiology, and neurobiology. Topics include reaction-diffusion equations for biochemical reactions, calcium wave propagation in excitable medium, and models for invading biological populations. Prerequisite: either courses in partial differential equations and statistics and probability, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 524

AMATH 532 Mathematics of Genome Analysis and Molecular Modeling (5)
Covers genome analysis, including bioinformatics and molecular modeling in terms of molecular dynamics. Prerequisite: either AMATH 506 or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 532

AMATH 533 Neural Control of Movement: A Computational Perspective (3)
Systematic overview of sensorimotor function on multiple levels of analysis, with emphasis on the phenomenology amenable to computational modeling. Topics include musculoskeletal mechanics, neural networks, optimal control and Bayesian inference, learning and adaptation, internal models, and neural coding and decoding. Prerequisite: vector calculus, linear algebra, MATLAB, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with CSE 529.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 533

AMATH 534 Dynamics of Neurons and Networks (5)
Covers mathematical analysis and simulation of neural systems - singles cells, networks, and populations - via tolls of dynamical systems, stochastic processes, and signal processing. Topics include single-neuron excitability and oscillations; network structure and synchrony; and stochastic and statistical dynamics of large cell populations. Prerequisite: either CSE 528 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 534

AMATH 535 Mathematical Ecology (5)
Considers models, methods, and issues in population ecology. Topics include the effects of density dependence, delays, demographic stochasticity, and age structure on population growth; population interactions (predation, competition, and mutualism); and application of optimal control theory to the management of renewable resources. Prerequisite: either a course in differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 535

AMATH 536 Spatial Models in Ecology and Epidemiology (5)
Considers models for growth and dispersal of biological populations. Topics include population persistence, climate-induced range shifts, and rates of spread of invading organisms. Considers reaction-diffusion equations, integrodifference equation, branching random walks, and other relevant classes of models. Prerequisite: either a course in partial differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 536

AMATH 567 Applied Analysis (5)
Reviews applications of metric and normed spaces, types of convergence, upper and lower bounds, and completion of a metric space; Banach spaces and Hilbert spaces, bounded linear operators, orthogonal sets and Fourier series, and the Riesz representation theorem; and the spectrum of a bounded linear operator and the Fredholm alternative. Introduces distributions. Prerequisite: either a course in real analysis or advanced calculus, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 567

AMATH 568 Advanced Methods for Ordinary Differential Equations (5)
Survey of practical solution techniques for ordinary differential equations. Linear systems of equations including nondiagonable case. Nonlinear systems; stability phase plane analysis. Asymptotic expansions. Regular and singular perturbations. Prerequisite: either a course in differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 568

AMATH 569 Advanced Methods for Partial Differential Equations (5)
Analytical solution techniques for linear partial differential equations. Discussion of how these arise in science and engineering. Transform and Green's function methods. Classification of second-order equations, characteristics. Conservation laws, shocks. Prerequisite: either a course in partial differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 569

AMATH 570 Asymptotic and Perturbation Methods (5)
Asymptotics for integrals, perturbation, and multiple-scale analysis. Singular perturbations: matched asymptotic expansions, boundary layers, shock layers, uniformly valid solutions. Prerequisite: AMATH 567, AMATH 568, AMATH 569, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 570

AMATH 572 Introduction to Applied Stochastic Analysis (5)
Introduction to the theory of probability and stochastic processes based on differential equations with applications to science and engineering. Poisson processes and continuous-time Markov processes, Brownian motions and diffusion. Prerequisite: either courses in dynamical systems, statistics, and probability, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 572

AMATH 573 Coherent Structures, Pattern Formation and Solitons (5)
Methods for nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) leading to coherent structures and patterns. Includes symmetries, conservations laws, stability Hamiltonian and variation methods of PDEs; interactions of structures such as waves or solitons; Lax pairs and inverse scattering; and Painleve analysis. Prerequisite: either a course in partial differential equations or permission of instructor. Offered: A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 573

AMATH 574 Conservation Laws and Finite Volume Methods (5)
Theory of linear and nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws modeling wave propagation in gases, fluids, and solids. Shock and rarefaction waves. Finite volume methods for numerical approximation of solutions; Godunov's method and high-resolution TVD methods. Stability, convergence, and entropy conditions. Prerequisite: either AMATH 586 or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 574

AMATH 575 Dynamical Systems (5)
Overview of ways in which complex dynamics arise in nonlinear dynamical systems. Topics include bifurcation theory, universality, Poincare maps, routes to chaos, horseshoe maps, Hamiltonian chaos, fractal dimensions, Liapunov exponents, and the analysis of time series. Examples from biology, mechanics, and other fields. Prerequisite: either AMATH 502 or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 575

AMATH 579 Intelligent Control through Learning and Optimization (3)
Design or near-optimal controllers for complex dynamical systems, using analytical techniques, machine learning, and optimization. Topics from deterministic and stochastic optimal control, reinforcement learning and dynamic programming, numerical optimization in the context of control, and robotics. Prerequisite: vector calculus; linear algebra; MATLAB. Offered: jointly with CSE 579.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 579

AMATH 581 Scientific Computing (5)
Project-oriented computational approach to solving problems arising in the physical/engineering sciences, finance/economics, medical, social, and biological sciences. Problems requiring use of advanced MATLAB routines and toolboxes. Covers graphical techniques for data presentation and communication of scientific results. Prerequisite: either a course in numerical analysis or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 581

AMATH 582 Computational Methods for Data Analysis (5)
Exploratory and objective data analysis methods applied to the physical, engineering, and biological sciences. Brief review of statistical methods and their computational implementation for studying time series analysis, spectral analysis, filtering methods, principal component analysis, orthogonal mode decomposition, and image processing and compression. Prerequisite: either MATLAB and linear algebra or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 582

AMATH 583 High-Performance Scientific Computing (5)
Introduction to hardware, software, and programming for large-scale scientific computing. Overview of multicore, cluster, and supercomputer architectures; procedure and object oriented languages; parallel computing paradigms and languages; graphics and visualization of large data sets; validation and verification; and scientific software development. Prerequisite: linear algebra; programming experience. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 583

AMATH 584 Applied Linear Algebra and Introductory Numerical Analysis (5)
Numerical methods for solving linear systems of equations, linear least squares problems, matrix eigen value problems, nonlinear systems of equations, interpolation, quadrature, and initial value ordinary differential equations. Prerequisite: either a course in linear algebra or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with MATH 584; A.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 584

AMATH 585 Numerical Analysis of Boundary Value Problems (5)
Numerical methods for steady-state differential equations. Two-point boundary value problems and elliptic equations. Iterative methods for sparse symmetric and non-symmetric linear systems: conjugate-gradients, preconditioners. Prerequisite: either AMATH 581, AMATH 584/MATH 584, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with MATH 585; W.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 585

AMATH 586 Numerical Analysis of Time Dependent Problems (5)
Numerical methods for time-dependent differential equations, including explicit and implicit methods for hyperbolic and parabolic equations. Stability, accuracy, and convergence theory. Spectral and pseudospectral methods. Prerequisite: either AMATH 581, AMATH 584/MATH 584, AMATH 585/MATH 585, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ATM S 581/MATH 586; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 586

AMATH 590 Special Topics (1-5, max. 30)
Topics of current interest in applied mathematics. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 590

AMATH 600 Independent Research or Study (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 600

AMATH 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 700

AMATH 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: AMATH 800

CFRM 460 Mathematical Methods for Quantitative Finance (3) NW, QSR
Covers selected mathematical methods needed to begin a master's program in quantitative finance. Topics include applications of calculus, linear algebra, and constrained optimization methods to fixed income, portfolio optimization, futures, options, and risk management.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 460

CFRM 461 Probability and Statistics for Computational Finance (3)
Covers basic concepts and methods of probability and statistical analysis and modeling for computational and quantitative finance. Coverage is carefully aligned with leading problems concerning prices and returns of individual assets and portfolios of assets. Key applications include financial risk management and portfolio performance analysis.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 461

CFRM 462 Introduction to Computational Finance and Financial Econometrics (5) Zivot
Covers probability models, data analysis, quantitative, and statistical methods using applications in finance, and introduction to and use of the R programming system for data analysis and statistical modeling. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 462

CFRM 463 R Programming for Quantitative Finance (1)
Introduction to R Programming language for applications in quantitative finance. Intended for students with no prior exposure to R and prepares them with the computing skills needed to progress effectively in an MS degree program in computational finance.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 463

CFRM 500 Special Studies in Computational Finance and Risk Management (1-6, max. 18)
Lecture and discussions of topics of current interest in computational finance and risk management. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 500

CFRM 510 Financial Data Access and Analysis with SQL, VBA, and Excel (4)
Provides skills in retrieving and manipulating financial data and in creating computational solutions to quantitative finance problems using SQL, VBA, and Excel. Also teaches skills in leveraging the powerful financial data modeling and analysis capabilities of R in conjunction with SQL, VBA, and Excel. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 510

CFRM 540 Capital Markets and Data for Computational Finance (1) Golbeck
Introduces students to the language and terminology of finance, capital markets, and data through selected textbook and financial news readings. Also teaches students how to access, manipulate, and analyze complex financial data from various repositories available through the internet.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 540

CFRM 541 Investment Science (4) Martin, Tung
Introduces the mathematical, statistical, and financial foundations of investment science. Topics include: Mean-Variance Portfolio Theory, efficient frontiers, expected tail loss, futures and forwards, no arbitration and risk-neutral pricing, and binomial tree derivate pricing. Prerequisite: coursework in introductory probability and statistics, and advanced calculus. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 541

CFRM 542 Financial Data Modeling and Analysis in R (4)
Introduces the R statistical programming language for computational finance application. Focuses on use of R packages for quantitative finance and R scripts development for statistical analysis and modeling methods in key quantitative finance areas including factor modeling, financial time series, and portfolio analytics. Prerequisite: CFRM 541. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 542

CFRM 543 Portfolio Optimization and Asset Management (4)
Covers long-only and long-short portfolio optimization with real-world constraints and costs using industrial strength optimization softwar; classical mean-variance and modern mean-versus downside risk optimization for dealing with fat-tailed skewed asset returns; optimization and risk analysis with factor models; and equity, mixed asset class, and fund-of-hedge portfolios. Prerequisite: CFRM 541 and CFRM 542, or permission of instructor. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 543

CFRM 544 Options and Other Derivatives (4)
Covers financial instrument options and derivatives. Explores how to price options and other derivatives and use them to hedge investment risk. Involves theory, statistical modeling, numerical methods, and computation using the R programming language. Prerequisite: CFRM 540; co-requisite: CFRM 541 or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 544

CFRM 545 Financial Risk Management I (4)
Introduces the concepts and methodologies of financial risk management. Uses derivatives for hedging risk, emphasizing fixed income and exchange rate derivatives. Includes models, credit derivatives, mortgage backed securities, and asset backed securities. First in a sequence of three on financial risk management. Prerequisite: CFRM 541 or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 545

CFRM 546 Financial Risk Management II (4)
Provides a comprehensive treatment of the theoretical concepts and modeling techniques of quantitative risk management focusing on practical tools to solve real-work problems. Covers methods for market, credit, and operational risk modeling. Prerequisite: CFRM 545 or permission of instructor. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 546

CFRM 547 Credit Risk Management (4) Henniger
Theory, applications & computational methods for credit risk measurement & management. Statistical and mathematical modeling of credit risk, emphasizing numerical methods & R programming. Methods include logistic regression, Monte Carlo simulation, & portfolio cash flow modeling. Covers default risk regression, analytics, & portfolio models of credit risk. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 547

CFRM 548 Monte Carlo Methods in Finance (4) Marting
Monte Carlo simulations in quantitative finance for portfolio assembly and financial risk management. Students learn theory and methods of tracking the behavior of underlying securities in an option or portfolio and determine the derivative's value by taking the expected value of the discounted payoffs at maturity. Prerequisite: CFRM 540. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 548

CFRM 551 Introduction to Trading Systems (4)
Introduces electronic trading systems. Uses the R programming language to develop, evaluate, and optimize quantitative trading strategies. Students apply trading strategies through a live paper-trading account with an online broker using real time market data.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 551

CFRM 552 Portfolio Performance Analysis and Benchmarking (4)
Covers fundamental principles and commonly used methods in performance measurement, analysis, and benchmarking of portfolio evaluation. Prerequisite: CFRM 541, MBA level investments course, or equivalent. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 552

CFRM 553 Financial Time Series Forecasting Methods (4)
Covers financial time series forecasting methods and their use in making investment decisions for asset management purposes. Asset-class specific forecasting methods. Uses the R statistical modeling and data analysis system for implementing and evaluating such forecasting methods. Prerequisite: CFRM 541 or permissions of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 553

CFRM 554 Endowment and Institutional Investment Management (4)
Focuses on the endowment management process and specific challenges facing institutional fund managers. Includes evaluating the role of an endowment, portfolio construction, risk management, manager selection, and alternative asset class investing. Utilizes concepts from finance and investments, macroeconomics, and mathematical optimization. Prerequisite: CFRM 541; recommended: CFRM 543 or equivalent. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 554

CFRM 555 Optimization Methods in Finance (4) Murray
Covers theory and efficient solution methods for optimization problems in finance. Includes financial solution methodologies using linear, non-linear, quadratic, and integer formulations; and dynamic and stochastic programming. Prerequisite: CFRM 540; linear algebra and matrix notation; statistics and probability; and experience with R language and MS Excel. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 555

CFRM 556 Statistical Modeling for Computational Finance (4) Konis
Advanced classical and modern statistical modeling methods for computational finance including: covariance matrix, correlation matrix, and principal components estimation and analysis; least-squares, robust, nonlinear and nonparametric regression for asset return factor models; shrinkage methods; risk factors selection; and clustering and classification methods. Asset management applications and computer exercise with R. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 556

CFRM 557 Financial Software Development and Integration with C++ (4)
Practical introduction to C++ programming for financial applications. Focuses on developing basic object oriented programming skills in C++ to implement computational finance solutions. Also includes integrating C++ applications with R, MATLAB, SQL, and VBA.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 557

CFRM 558 Fixed Income Analytics and Portfolio Management (4)
Covers fixed income markets and securities, data sources, analytics and portfolio management methods, in particular the valuation, risks, and risk management of fixed income securities. Uses a hands-on data-oriented and computational focus. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 558

CFRM 559 Stochastic Calculus for Quantitative Finance (4) Golbeck
Provides a systematic examination of financial derivatives pricing using stochastic calculus. Examines popular stochastic differential equation models such as Geometric Brownian motion, Vasicek, Hull-White, Cox-Ingersoll-Ross, Black-Karasinski, Heath-Jarrow-Morton, and Brace-Gatarek-Musiela, as well as Poisson and Levy processes. Applications include equity, fixed-income, and credit derivatives. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 559

CFRM 560 Actuarial Models and Estimation (4)
Surveys non-life insurance mathematics. Topics include utility theory, insurance, individual and collective risk models, ruin theory, risk measures, credibility theory, and generalized linear models. Includes writing computer programs to build and evaluate these models using real data. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 560

CFRM 600 Independent Research or Study (1-6, max. 18)
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 600

CFRM 601 Internship (1-6, max. 30)
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 601

CFRM 700 Master's Thesis (1-6, max. 18)
View course details in MyPlan: CFRM 700

ASTBIO 115 Astrobiology: Life in the Universe (5) NW R. BUICK, D. CATLING, V. MEADOWS, W. SULLIVAN
Introduction to the new science of astrobiology, study of the origin and evolution of life on Earth, and the search for microbial and intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe. Designed for non-science, liberal arts majors. Offered: jointly with ASTR 115/BIOL 114/ESS 115/OCEAN 115.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 115

ASTBIO 501 Astrobiology Disciplines (4) R. BUICK, D. CATLING, V. MEADOWS
Review of research and subject matter relevant to astrobiology from within the disciplines of biology, astronomy, oceanography, atmospheric science, chemistry, planetary science, and geology. Offered: A, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 501

ASTBIO 502 Astrobiology Topics (4) R. BUICK, D. CATLING, V. MEADOWS
Investigation in detail of research topics of current interest. Offered: A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 502

ASTBIO 550 Professional Development for Astrobiology (2)
Seminar in preparation for the academic job market; writing and reviewing grant proposals; building and managing interdisciplinary research teams; understanding the multiple career paths available in astrobiology; interdisciplinary teaching; and professional ethics. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 550

ASTBIO 575 Seminar in Astrobiology (1, max. 10)
Discussion of recent research in astrobiology. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 575

ASTBIO 576 Astrobiology Colloquium (1, max. 15)
Current research topics in astrobiology. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 576

ASTBIO 600 Independent Study or Research (*)
Study or research under the supervision of individual faculty members.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTBIO 600

ASTR 101 Astronomy (5) NW, QSR
Introduction to the universe, with emphasis on conceptual, as contrasted with mathematical, comprehension. Modern theories, observations; ideas concerning nature, evolution of galaxies; quasars, stars, black holes, planets, solar system. Not open for credit to students who have taken ASTR 102 or ASTR 301; not open to upper-division students majoring in physical sciences or engineering. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 101

ASTR 102 Introduction to Astronomy (5) NW, QSR
Emphasis on mathematical and physical comprehension of nature, the sun, stars, galaxies, and cosmology. Designed for students who have had algebra and trigonometry and high school or introductory-level college physics. Cannot be taken for credit in combination with ASTR 101 or ASTR 301. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 102

ASTR 105 Exploring the Moon (5) NW Smith
Examines the questions why did we go to the moon, what did we learn, and why do we want to go back. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 105

ASTR 115 Astrobiology: Life in the Universe (5) NW R. BUICK, D. CATLING, V. MEADOWS, W. SULLIVAN
Introduction to the new science of astrobiology, study of the origin and evolution of life on Earth, and the search for microbial and intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe. Designed for non-science, liberal arts majors. Offered: jointly with ASTBIO 115/BIOL 114/ESS 115/OCEAN 115.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 115

ASTR 150 The Planets (5) NW, QSR
For liberal arts and beginning science students. Survey of the planets of the solar system, with emphases on recent space exploration of the planets and on the comparative evolution of the Earth and the other planets. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 150

ASTR 160 Introduction to Exoplanets (3/5) NW
Introduction to exoplanets. Explores how studies of extrasolar planets have changed our views of how planets and planetary systems form and evolve. Examines the science behind the search for Earth-like planets and life beyond our Solar System. May not earn credit if credit earned in ASTR 419. Recommended: one 100- or 200-level astronomy course.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 160

ASTR 190 Modern Topics in Astronomy for Non-Science Majors (3/5, max. 10) NW
Topics of current interest, such as origin of chemical elements, novae and supernovae, white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, active galaxies, quasars, or interstellar medium and astrochemistry. Choice of topics depends on instructor and class interest. Prerequisite: either one 100- or one 200-level ASTR course.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 190

ASTR 192 Pre-Major in Astronomy Research Seminar (3-5) NW
Introduction to astronomical computing and research methods for students interested in astronomy and in the premajor-in-astronomy program. Co-requisite: ASTR 102. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 192

ASTR 201 The Universe and the Origin of Life (5) NW, QSR
Sequel to 101 or 102, emphasizing modern views of the atomic and molecular evolution of the universe from the initial "big bang" through the formation of the solar system and the emergence of biological forms on the earth. The latter part of the course considers questions about the existence of, and communication with, extraterrestrial intelligent life, and finally the ultimate fate of the cosmos.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 201

ASTR 210 Distance and Time: Size and Age in the Universe (5) NW, QSR
Space and time as basic concepts in physical science. How we define and measure them, how the concepts have developed over the centuries, and how modern measurements allow us to determine the size and age of the universe.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 210

ASTR 211 The Universe and Change (5) NW, QSR
Gravity as central to the form and evolution of the universe. Conceptual formulation of gravity from the Renaissance to Einstein. Its consequences from the falling of an apple to the slowing of the expansion of the universe. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 211

ASTR 270 Public Outreach in Astronomy (3) VLPA/NW
Emphasis on giving effective scientific presentations, developing and giving educational programs to school-age groups, and communicating knowledge of astronomy to others. Give talks at the Jacobsen Observatory on campus and presentations in the Astronomy Department's planetarium. Learn to operate a telescope and the planetarium equipment. Prerequisite: one astronomy course at either the 100-, 200-, or 300-level. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 270

ASTR 300 Introduction to Programming for Astronomical Applications (2) QSR Smith
Introduction to programming needed for astronomical applications: Linux operating systems, PERL, IDL. Recommended for astronomy majors planning to take 400-level astronomy courses, to pursue individual research projects, or to apply for research experience for undergraduate appointments. Prerequisite: either ASTR 321, ASTR 322, or ASTR 323, any of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 300

ASTR 301 Astronomy for Scientists and Engineers (3) NW
Introduction to astronomy for students in the physical sciences or engineering. Topics similar to ASTR 101, but the approach uses more mathematics and physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 123.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 301

ASTR 313 Science in Civilization: Physics and Astrophysics Since 1850 (5) I&S/NW
Organization and pursuit of the physical and astrophysical sciences, focusing on the major unifying principles of physics and astronomy and the social and cultural settings in which they were created. Offered: jointly with HSTCMP 313.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 313

ASTR 321 The Solar System (3) NW
Solar system; planetary atmospheres, surfaces and interiors, the moon, comets. The solar wind and interplanetary medium. Formation of the solar system. Prerequisite: PHYS 224 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 321

ASTR 322 The Contents of Our Galaxy (3) NW
Introduction to astronomy. Basic properties of stars, stellar systems, interstellar dust and gas, and the structure of our galaxy. Prerequisite: PHYS 224 which may be taken concurrently; recommended: PHYS 225 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 322

ASTR 323 Extragalactic Astronomy and Cosmology (3) NW
Galaxies, optical and radio morphology and properties. Clusters of galaxies, radio sources, and quasars. Observational cosmology. Prerequisite: ASTR 322 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 323

ASTR 400 Undergraduate Research Seminar (1) NW
Introduces research topics conducted by astronomy faculty. Each week a faculty member describes her/his current research and the opportunities available for interested majors to participate in the research. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 400

ASTR 419 Exoplanets (3) NW
Exoplanet properties, discovery, and habitability. Examines the science involved in the search for Earth-like planets and life beyond our Solar System. Topics include: exoplanet environments, modelling exoplanet planetary systems, planetary habitability, detection, and properties of exoplanets. May not earn credit if credit earned in ASTR 160. Prerequisite: ASTR 321.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 419

ASTR 421 Stellar Observations and Theory (3) NW
Observations and theory of the atmospheres, chemical composition, internal structure, energy sources, and evolutionary history of stars. Prerequisite: ASTR 322. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 421

ASTR 423 High-Energy Astrophysics (3) NW
High-energy phenomena in the universe. Includes supernova, pulsars, neutron stars, x-ray and gamma-ray sources, black holes, cosmic rays, quasi stellar objects, active galactic nuclei, diffuse background radiations. Radiative emission, absorption processes, and models derived from observational data. Prerequisite: PHYS 224; PHYS 225.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 423

ASTR 425 Cosmology (3) QSR Agol, Connolly, Quinn
Studies the universe as a whole. Overview of fundamental observations of cosmology and an introduction to general relativity. Examines theories of the past and future history of the universe, the nature of dark matter and dark energy, and the origin of ordinary matter on the large-scale structure. Prerequisite: PHYS 224; PHYS 225.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 425

ASTR 427 Methods of Computational Astrophysics (3) NW Quinn
Provides hands-on experiences in writing computer programs to solve astrophysics problems. Topics include: interpolation and extrapolation, integration, ordinary, differential equations, root finding, optimization, linear algebra, Monte-Carlo partial differential equations, and parallel techniques.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 427

ASTR 480 Introduction to Astronomical Data Analysis (5) NW
Hands-on experience with electronic imaging devices (CCDs) and software for image reduction and analysis. Introduction to operating systems, reduction software, and statistical analysis with applications to CCD photometry. Prerequisite: ASTR 300; ASTR 323, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 480

ASTR 481 Introduction to Astronomical Observation (5) NW
Theory and practice of obtaining optical data at a telescope. Preparation, obtaining data with a CCD on a telescope, and subsequent data analysis for completion of a research project. Prerequisite: ASTR 480. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 481

ASTR 482 Writing Scientific Papers (2) Szkody
Principles of organizing, developing, and writing resumes, scientific research papers for journals, and astronomy articles for general public interest. Prerequisite: ASTR 481, ASTR 499, PHYS 494, PHYS 495, or PHYS 496, any of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 482

ASTR 497 Topics in Current Astronomy (1-3, max. 9) NW
Recent developments in one field of astronomy or astrophysics.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 497

ASTR 498 Independent Study (1-3, max. 15) NW
Astronomy-related projects supervised by a faculty member. Projects may be hardware, software, or library work in preparation for conducting astronomical research. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 498

ASTR 499 Undergraduate Research (*, max. 15)
Special astronomical problems and observational projects, by arrangement with instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 499

ASTR 500 Practical Methods for Teaching Astronomy (1-3, max. 5)
Seminar in the preparation of lecture and workshop materials with emphasis on demonstration, visual aids, and the evaluation of students' progress. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 500

ASTR 507 Physical Foundations of Astrophysics I (3)
Thermodynamics from an astronomer's point of view: black body radiation, basic radiative transfer, equation of state, degenerate gases, crystallization at high density.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 507

ASTR 508 Physical Foundations of Astrophysics II (3)
Introduction to astronomical hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics, basic theorems and application to stellar and interstellar magnetic fields. Introduction to plasma physics and waves in a plasma.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 508

ASTR 509 Physical Foundations of Astrophysics III (3)
Potential theory as applied to astrophysical systems. Orbits. Integrals of motion. Equilibrium and stability of stellar systems. Encounters of stellar systems. Kinetic theory of collisional systems. Applications of stellar dynamics to star clusters, galaxies, and large-scale structure.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 509

ASTR 510 Nuclear Astrophysics (3)
Big bang nucleosynthesis; nuclear reactions in stars; solar neutrinos and neutrino oscillations; core-collapse supernovae; nucleosynthesis in stars, novae, and supernovae; neutron starts; composition and sources of cosmic rays; gamma ray bursts; atmospheric neutrinos. Offered: jointly with PHYS 554; A.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 510

ASTR 511 Galactic Structure (3)
Kinematics, dynamics, and contents of the galaxy. Spiral structure. Structure and evolution of galaxies.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 511

ASTR 512 Extragalactic Astronomy (3)
Types of galaxies. Integrated properties, content, and dynamics. Extragalactic distance scale, groups and clusters. Radio sources. Observational cosmology.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 512

ASTR 513 Cosmology and Particle Astrophysics (3)
Big bang cosmology; relativistic world models and classical tests; background radiation; cosmological implications of nucleosynthesis; baryogenesis; inflation; galaxy and large-scale structure formation; quasars; intergalactic medium; dark matter.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 513

ASTR 519 Radiative Processes in Astrophysics (3)
Theory and applications of astrophysical radiation processes: transfer theory; thermal radiation; theory of radiation fields and radiation from moving charges; bremsstrahlung; synchrotron; Compton scattering; plasma effects.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 519

ASTR 521 Stellar Atmospheres (3)
Theory of continuous radiation and spectral line formation. Applications to the sun and stars. Prerequisite: PHYS 421 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 521

ASTR 531 Stellar Interiors (4)
Physical laws governing the temperature, pressure, and mass distribution in stars. Equation of state, opacity, nuclear energy generation, computational methods. Models of main sequence stars and star formation. Prerequisite: PHYS 421 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 531

ASTR 532 Stellar Evolution (3)
Theoretical and observational approaches to stellar evolution. Structure of red giants, supernovae, and white dwarfs. Observations of star clusters and the chemical composition of stars as they relate to the theory of stellar structure. Prerequisite: ASTR 531.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 532

ASTR 541 Interstellar Matter (3)
Physical conditions and motions of neutral and ionized gas in interstellar space. Interstellar dust, magnetic fields, formation of grains, clouds, and stars. Prerequisite: modern physics or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 541

ASTR 555 Planetary Atmospheres (3)
Problems of origin, evolution, and structure of planetary atmospheres, emphasizing elements common to all; roles of radiation, chemistry, and dynamical processes; new results on the atmospheres of Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and other solar system objects in the context of comparative planetology. Offered: jointly with ATM S 555/ESS 581.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 555

ASTR 557 Origin of the Solar System (3)
Nebular and nonnebular theories of the solar system origin; collapse from the interstellar medium, grain growth in the solar nebula, formation of planetesimals and planets, early evolution of the planets and other possible planetary systems; physical and chemical evidence upon which the ideas concerning the origin of the solar system are based. Offered: jointly with ESS 583.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 557

ASTR 561 High Energy Astrophysics (3)
Observed properties of supernovae, x-ray stars, radio sources, quasars. Theories explaining such objects. Origin of cosmic rays.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 561

ASTR 575 Seminar in Astronomy (1-2, max. 20)
Discussion of recent research in astronomy and astrophysics. Prerequisite: permission of department. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 575

ASTR 576 Astronomy Colloquium (1, max. 20)
Current research topics in astronomy and astrophysics. Prerequisite: permission of department. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 576

ASTR 581 Techniques in Optical Astronomy (5)
Theory and practice of obtaining optical data. Astronomical photoelectric photometers, spectrographs, interferometers, CCDs, and infrared equipment. Data-reduction techniques with emphasis on statistical analysis using digital computers. Observations with MRO thirty-inch telescope.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 581

ASTR 597 Topics in Observational Astrophysics (1-5, max. 20)
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 597

ASTR 598 Topics in Theoretical Astrophysics (1-5, max. 20)
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 598

ASTR 599 Advanced Astronomy Seminar (1-3, max. 6)
Practical exercises in astrophysics. Emphasis on methods and techniques of simulation, acquisition, evaluation, and analysis of observational data and its interpretation using models of astrophysical systems. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 599

ASTR 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 600

ASTR 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 700

ASTR 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: ASTR 800

BIOL 100 Introductory Biology (5) NW
Develops an awareness of science by studying basic biological principles and their application to problems of humans and society in the contexts of special topics or themes, which vary quarter to quarter. For non-science majors only.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 100

BIOL 106 Introductory Biology Seminar (1/3, max. 6) NW
Focuses on current topics in biology. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. Designed to enhance learning skills of students who intend to take BIOL 180/BIOL 200/BIOL 220 and major in one of the biological sciences. Recommended: high school chemistry and biology, or one quarter of college chemistry.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 106

BIOL 108 Evolution and Human Behavior (3) NW
Introduction to evolution by natural selection, examining the light it can throw on human biology and behavior in such areas as the nature of sex differences, sexual conflict, and conflict between parents and children. Does not fulfill major requirements. Offered: jointly with BIO A 100.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 108

BIOL 110 Freshman Discovery Seminar in Biology (5) NW
Introduces incoming freshman to research basics and scholarly inquiry skills used in the study of biology.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 110

BIOL 114 Astrobiology: Life in the Universe (5) NW R. BUICK, D. CATLING, V. MEADOWS, W. SULLIVAN
Introduction to the new science of astrobiology, study of the origin and evolution of life on Earth, and the search for microbial and intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe. Designed for non-science, liberal arts majors. Offered: jointly with ASTBIO 115/ASTR 115/ESS 115/OCEAN 115.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 114

BIOL 118 Survey of Physiology (5) NW
Human physiology, for nonmajors and health sciences students. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 118

BIOL 119 Elementary Physiology Laboratory (1) NW
Prerequisite: BIOL 118 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 119

BIOL 120 Current Controversies in Biology (2-5, max. 6) NW
Explores a current controversial topic in biology, stressing information needed by the general public to make informed personal, political, and ethical decisions relating to this topic.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 120

BIOL 180 Introductory Biology (5) NW
Mendelian genetics, evolution, biodiversity of life forms, ecology, and conservation biology. Open to all students interested in biology whether intending to major in the biological sciences, enroll in preprofessional programs, or fulfill a Natural World requirement. First course in a three-quarter series (BIOL 180, BIOL 200, BIOL 220). Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 180

BIOL 200 Introductory Biology (5) NW
For students intending to take advanced courses in the biological sciences or enroll in preprofessional programs. Metabolism and energetics, structure and function of biomolecules, cell structure and function, animal development. Second course in a three-quarter series (BIOL 180, BIOL 200, BIOL 220). Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120; either CHEM 152, CHEM 155, CHEM 220, CHEM 223, or CHEM 237. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 200

BIOL 220 Introductory Biology (5) NW
For students intending to take advanced courses in the biological sciences or enroll in preprofessional programs. Animal physiology, plant development and physiology. Final course in a three-quarter series (BIOL 180, BIOL 200, BIOL 220). Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 200, B BIO 220, or TESC 130. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 220

BIOL 250 Marine Biology (3/5) I&S/NW
Lecture-laboratory course in marine biology focusing on physical, biological, and social aspects of the marine environment. Topics include oceanography, ecology, physiology, behavior, conservation, fisheries, exploration, and activism. Weekend field trip. Honors section research project. Offered: jointly with FISH 250/OCEAN 250; AS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 250

BIOL 280 The History of Life (4) NW P. WARD
Follows the history of life from its first formation including the origin of life and life's diversification from single cells through multi-celluarity. Examines fossils and DNA evidence from understanding the sequence of events and evolutionary history of life.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 280

BIOL 293 Study Abroad - Biology (1-10, max. 10) NW
For participants in UW Study Abroad program. Specific content varies and must be individually evaluated. Credit does not apply to major requirements without approval.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 293

BIOL 300 Introduction to Neuroscience (4) NW
Provides a broad introduction to the study of brain function in humans and other animals. Emphasizes how circuits within the brain process sensory information and generate complex movements. No credit if NBIO 301, NBIO 302, or BIOL 461 already taken. Prerequisite: either MATH 111, MATH 112, MATH 120, MATH 124, MATH 144, Q SCI 190, or Q SCI 291. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 300

BIOL 302 Laboratory Techniques in Cell and Molecular Biology (4) NW T. IMAIZUMI, L. MARTIN-MORRIS
Explores the use of various cell and molecular laboratory techniques, such as PCR, cloning, gel electrophoresis, and bacterial transformation through hands-on experiments. Students produce a portfolio of techniques they have learned. Writing credit. Prerequisite: either BIOL 355 or a minimum grade of 2.5 in either BIOL 200, B BIO 200, or TESC 130.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 302

BIOL 305 Science Communication: Video Storytelling in Biology (3) VLPA/NW P. BOERSMA
Students make a short film on a biological story, concept, or theory. Includes developing a storyline, getting the shots to make compelling viewing, editing, and producing a short video. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 305

BIOL 311 Biology of Fishes (3/5) NW
Covers morphological, physiological, behavioral, and ecological diversity of fishes of the world; designed to provide a basic foundation for advanced courses in all areas of aquatic sciences. 3-credit option does not include laboratory. Recommended: 10 credits biological science. Offered: jointly with FISH 311; W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 311

BIOL 315 Biological Impacts of Climate Change (3) NW
Covers the biological impacts of climate change, including changes in species distributions and interactions, altered phenology, and ecosystem dynamics. Discusses implications of these biological impacts for society (e.g., food security, public health, and resource management). Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 315

BIOL 317 Plant Classification and Identification (5) NW R. OLMSTEAD
Classification and diversity of seed plants; concepts and principles of classification, lab and field study of common plant families in Washington, and skill development for identification of species. One weekend field trip. Offered: SpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 317

BIOL 325 The Tree of Life (4) NW S. FREEMAN
Provides an overview of biodiversity by focusing on key characteristics of major lineage throughout the tree of life. Explores major diversification events by analyzing changes in reproduction, energetics, cell structure, sensory systems, and adaptations to abiotic stress, and species interactions. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 325

BIOL 330 Natural History of Marine Invertebrates (5) NW
Field and laboratory course emphasizing the habits, habitats, adaptations, and interrelationships of marine animals. Weekend field trips required. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 330

BIOL 331 Landscape Plant Recognition (3) NW S. REICHARD
Field recognition of important groups of woody landscape plants, emphasizing diversity at the genus and family levels. Cultivated plant nomenclature. Plant descriptive characters evident in the field with eye and hand lens. Hardiness and landscape applications. Recommended: BIOL 317. Offered: jointly with ESRM 331; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 331

BIOL 340 Genetics and Molecular Ecology (5) NW
Application of molecular markers to ecology, evolution, and the management of living resources. Emphasis on understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the approach based on case studies. Prerequisite: BIOL 200. Offered: jointly with FISH 340; A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 340

BIOL 350 Foundations in Physiology (3) NW
Physiology core course for biological sciences majors. Analysis of basic principles of animal and plant physiology, with emphasis on cellular processes that mediate organismic processes. Serves as gateway to upper-division courses in physiology. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; recommended: either PHYS 115 or PHYS 122. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 350

BIOL 354 Foundations in Evolution and Systematics (3) NW
Evolution and systematics core course for biological sciences majors. Emphasizes patterns, processes, and consequences of evolutionary change. Serves as gateway to 400-level courses and seminars in evolution, population genetics, sociobiology, conservation biology, phylogenetics, and systematics. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, TESC 120, or BIO A 201. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 354

BIOL 355 Foundations in Molecular Cell Biology (3) NW
Cell biology core course for biological sciences majors. Emphasis on molecular approaches to understand cell structure, function, and regulation, and the analysis of experimental design and data interpretation. Serves as a prerequisite to advanced 400-level cell, molecular, and developmental biology courses and seminars. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 200, B BIO 200, TESC 130. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 355

BIOL 356 Foundations in Ecology (3) NW
Ecology core course for biological sciences majors. Emphasizes understanding species interactions in biological communities and relationships of communities to environment. Serves as a prerequisite to 400-level courses and senior seminars in ecology, population, and conservation biology. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 356

BIOL 360 Cellular Anatomy (4) NW Zeman
Recognition of cellular and tissue structures in plants and animals with correlations to normal physiology and disease states. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; may not be taken for credit if credit earned in BIOL 403.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 360

BIOL 380 Biomedical Advances and Society (3) I&S A. SCHIVELL
Recent biological advances studied in the context of our society, designed to foster critical thinking, public awareness, and policy impact. Topics may include human reproductive technologies, genetic engineering, embryonic stem cell research, and medical scanning improvements. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 380

BIOL 385 Evolutionary Medicine (3) NW B. DUNCAN, D. EISENBERG
Explores evolutionary causes of health and disease. Considers how natural selection and the legacies of our human, primate, mammalian and bacterial ancestries have shaped our biology. Topics include mental disorders, aging, cancer, diet, obesity, diabetes, infectious diseases, racism, and health differences between human groups. Prerequisite: either BIO A 201 or BIOL 180. Offered: jointly with BIO A 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 385

BIOL 396 Peer Facilitation - Teaching in Biology (1-4, max. 8) NW
For undergraduates working in biology courses as peer facilitators. Peer facilitators assist with labs, lectures, and course administration and gain direct classroom experience. No independent teaching or grading. Opportunities vary by quarter and instructor. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350, BIOL 354, BIOL 355, or BIOL 356. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 396

BIOL 399 Biology Internship Program (2-12, max. 15) NW B. WIGGINS
Coordinated internship in a biology-related field. Allows a structured, real world biology work experiences off-campus. All internships must be approved by instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 399

BIOL 400 Experiments in Molecular Biology (4) NW A. CROWE, A. SCHIVELL
Integrated reading, writing, and experimentation in molecular biology. Design and implementation of experiments using modern molecular biology techniques to address current questions in biology. Emphasizes reading and evaluating primary research literature. Includes practice in different scientific writing styles. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 400

BIOL 401 Advanced Cell Biology (3) NW
Selected topics in molecular cell biology. Strong emphasis on reading and interpreting primary research literature. Writing intensive course. Prerequisite: BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 401

BIOL 402 Functional Genomics (4) NW A. PAREDEZ
Students perform initial characterization of novel genes through epitope tagging and localization. Skills covered include: preparation of solutions, Genomic Database queries, PCR, electrophoresis, DNA purification, cloning, transformation, and immunofluorescence microscopy. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 402

BIOL 403 Physiological Mechanisms of Histology (5) NW L. ZEMAN
Develops recognition of cellular structures with correlations to normal physiology and disease states. Laboratory projects cover harvesting, sectioning, and mounting tissue. Includes weekly scientific papers. Prerequisite: either a grade of 3.0 in either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140, or a minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 350 or BIOL 355; may not be taken for credit if credit earned in BIOL 360.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 403

BIOL 404 Animal Physiology: Cellular Aspects (3) NW H. DE LA IGLESIA
Examines the physiology of membrane transport, nervous signaling, sensory systems, behavioral modulation, muscle, neuronal and endocrine integration, and circadian rhythms. Emphasis on the cellular and tissue level. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; either CHEM 224 or CHEM 239; either PHYS 115 or PHYS 122. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 404

BIOL 405 Cellular and Molecular Biology of Human Disease (3) NW
Emphasizes the understanding of disease mechanisms through studies of genetic and cellular basis human disease and disease models. Based on analyses of primary research articles. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 355; either GENOME 361 or GENOME 371; either BIOC 405, BIOC 440, BIOL 401.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 405

BIOL 408 Mechanisms of Animal Behavior (4) NW Beecher, Brenowitz, Sisneros
Comparative exploration of physiological and perceptual mechanisms that control behaviors necessary for survival and reproduction in animals. Model systems discussed include animal communication, mate choice, escape behavior, learning and memory, orientation, biological rhythms, foraging behavior. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in BIOL 180, or 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300. Offered: jointly with PSYCH 408.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 408

BIOL 409 Sociobiology (5) NW
Biological bases of social behavior, emphasizing evolution as a paradigm. Emphasizes how to think like an evolutionary biologist, especially with regard to interest conflict. Topics are individual versus group selection, kin selection, altruism, mating systems, sexual conflict, alternate reproductive strategies, and parent/offspring conflict. Prerequisite: either minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 180, 2.0 in B BIO 180, 2.0 in TESC 120, 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300. Offered: jointly with PSYCH 409.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 409

BIOL 411 Developmental Biology (4) NW
Embryology and subsequent development of vertebrate and invertebrate animals, including Xenopus, mammals, chicks, Drosophila, echinoderms. Morphological changes in developing animals; experimental analysis of developing systems; underlying genetic and biochemical regulation of development. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 3.0 in either BIOL 200, B BIO 200, or TESC 130, or a minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 354 or BIOL 355. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 411

BIOL 413 Molecular Genetics of Development (4) NW J. PARRISH
Uses molecular biology, cell biology, and genetic approaches to investigate how nutrient signals influence neuron growth. Prerequisite: BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 413

BIOL 414 Molecular Evolution (5) NW
Survey of empirical approaches to the study of molecular evolution and ecology, drawing on examples from a variety of taxa and the recent literature. Topics include DNA sequencing and systematics, fingerprinting approaches in behavioral ecology, and adaptive evolution at the molecular level. Prerequisite: BIOL 354. Offered: jointly with GENOME 414.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 414

BIOL 415 Evolution and Development (3) NW D. PARICHY
Analysis of intertwined developmental and evolutionary processes studied through evolution of developmental genes, proteins, and expression patterns in different organisms. Includes reading and analyzing implications for ecology evolution, and human disease. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 3.0 in BIOL 200, B BIO 200, or TESC 130, or a minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 354 or BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 415

BIOL 416 Molecular Genetics of Plant Development (3)
Plant growth and development examined in molecular-genetic terms. Covers mutation, dominance, redundancy, epistasis, and key technologies for discovery of gene function as well as embryogenesis, meristem formation, flower development, and other problems in plant development. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 220, B BIO 220, TESC 140, GENOME 361, or GENOME 371.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 416

BIOL 417 Comparative Reproductive Physiology of Vertebrates (4) NW
Compares the reproductive physiology of fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350 or BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 417

BIOL 418 Biological Clocks and Rhythms (3) NW H. DE LA IGLESIA
Examines circadian rhythms and other forms of biological rhythmicity, including annual and tidal rhythms. Includes theoretical background as well as aspects that range from the molecular and cellular basis to the ecological and evolutionary implications of biological rhythms. Prerequisite: BIOL 350 or BIOL 355.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 418

BIOL 421 Ecological and Evolutionary Physiology of Animals (3) NW
Explores the role of physiology in the ecology and evolution of animals. Special emphasis on how physiology influences responses to environmental change. Prerequisite: BIOL 350; either BIOL 354 or BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 421

BIOL 422 Physiology of Plant Behavior (3) NW E. VAN VOLKENBURGH
Advanced physiology seminar focusing on plant sensory mechanisms, transport and integration of information, and behavior in response to a variety of environmental stimuli. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 422

BIOL 423 Marine Ecological Processes (3) NW E. CARRINGTON
Studies the ecology of the oceans and coastal regions, emphasizing benthic communities common to the Pacific Northwest. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120; recommended: either BIOL 250 or BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 423

BIOL 424 Plant Ecophysiology (5) NW S. KIM
Explores physiological mechanisms that underlie ecological observations, including how above- and below-ground microclimates develop and affect plant physiological processes. Discusses acclimation to environmental change along with species differences in physiological processes and plant's occupation of heterogeneous environments. Laboratories emphasize field measurement techniques. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, TESC 120, ESRM 201, ESRM 162, or FISH 162. Offered: jointly with ESRM 478; W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 424

BIOL 425 Plant Physiology and Development (5) NW
Expanded coverage of plant growth, nutrition, metabolism, and development. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 425

BIOL 427 Biomechanics (5) NW T. DANIEL
Physical biology emphasizing a mechanical approach to ecological, evolutionary, and physiological questions. Basic principles underlying fluid and solid mechanics to explore responses of animals to flows, loads, and motions. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; either MATH 125 or Q SCI 292; either PHYS 114 or PHYS 121.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 427

BIOL 428 Sensory Neurophysiology and Ecology (3) NW J. RIFFELL
Examines behavioral and physiological processes within an environmental framework. Uses a synthetic approach emphasizing applications to cell biology, physiology and behavior, and biomechanics. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350 or BIOL 355; either PHYS 114 or PHYS 121; recommended: linear algebra.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 428

BIOL 430 Marine Zoology (5) NW
Survey of groups of invertebrate animals represented in the San Juan Archipelago; natural history, functional morphology, ecology, distribution, habitat, adaptation, trophic interrelationships, and evolution. Prerequisite:BIOL 445, which must be taken concurrently; permission of Friday Harbor director. Recommended: 20 credits in biological sciences. Offered: jointly with FHL 430.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 430

BIOL 432 Marine Invertebrate Zoology (9) NW
Comparative morphology and biology of marine invertebrates with emphasis on field and laboratory studies. Representatives of all major and most minor phyla are collected, observed alive, and studied in detail. Taken at Friday Harbor Laboratories. Not open for credit to students who have taken BIOL 433 or BIOL 434. Recommended: 20 credits in biological sciences. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 432

BIOL 433 Marine Ecology (5) NW J. RUESINK
Study of marine ecological processes such as recruitment, disturbance, competition, and predation, and their effects on the structure and diversity of marine communities. Weekend field trips to local intertidal habitats required. Prerequisite: either BIOL 356, BIOL 472, or a minimum grade of 3.4 in either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 433

BIOL 434 Invertebrate Zoology (5) NW
Comparative biology and morphology of invertebrates. Laboratory work emphasizes structures and functions. Emphasizes annelids and related worms, mollusks, and arthropods. Not open to students who have taken BIOL 430 or BIOL 432. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 434

BIOL 437 Herpetology (5) NW
Amphibian and reptile biology, with emphasis on evolutionary relationships, ecology, behavior, morphology, physiology, and taxonomy. Lectures emphasize major trends and mechanisms maintaining diversity in form and function. Labs cover morphology and taxonomy with emphasis on the local fauna. Weekend, camping field trips required. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.5 in BIOL 354.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 437

BIOL 438 Quantitative Approaches to Paleobiology, Morphology, and Systematics (5) NW
Introduction to the principles and analytical methods in the study of paleobiology, morphology, and systematics. Topics include paleobiogeography, morphology-based phylogenetics, evolutionary rates, biodiversity curves, functional morphology, morphometrics, and paleoecology. Emphasis on application of methods using fossil and modern specimens. Prerequisite: either BIOL 280, BIOL 354, or ESS 213.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 438

BIOL 440 General Mycology (5) NW J. AMMIRATI
General survey of the fungi with emphasis on life cycles, structure, physiology, economic importance. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 440

BIOL 441 Trends in Land Plant Evolution (5) NW
Covers key innovations and trends during the evolution of land plants. Uses an evolution of development (evo-devo) approach that compares morphological, anatomical, developmental, and molecular traits across main evolutionary lineages of plants. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; either BIOL 350, BIOL 354, BIOL 355, or BIOL 356. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 441

BIOL 442 Mushrooms and Related Fungi (5) NW J. AMMIRATI
General biology, ecology, and classification of mushrooms, polypores, puffballs, and other related basidiomycetes. Emphasis on Pacific Northwest species. Prerequisite: either BIOL 360, BIOL 403, or BIOL 440.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 442

BIOL 443 Evolution of Mammals and their Ancestors (5) NW
Highlights the evolutionary history and systematics of mammals and their ancestors. Examines fossil and modern mammal specimens from the Burke Museum collections. Required field trip. Prerequisite: either BIOL 354, BIOL 453, or ESS 100. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 443

BIOL 444 Ornithology (5) NW
Field, lecture, and laboratory study of birds from an evolutionary perspective. Emphasizes taxonomy, breeding systems, brood parasitism, appearance, molt, migration, orientation, social behavior, song, and flight. Includes Saturday and weekend field trips for which students are required to share a portion of transportation costs. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; recommended: BIOL 350 or BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 444

BIOL 445 Marine Botany (5) NW
Survey of plants represented in marine environments; natural history; ecology, distribution, habitat, adaptation, and trophic interrelationships. Taken at Friday Harbor laboratories. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; BIOL 430, which must be taken concurrently. Offered: jointly with FHL 440.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 445

BIOL 446 Cell and Molecular Techniques in Algal Biology (3) NW R. CATTOLICO
Introduction to major algal groups emphasizing differences in form and function. Laboratory techniques include methods for culturing and plating algae; fluorescence microscopy of chloroplasts and lipid bodies; subcellular fractionation of organelles; pigment analysis and protein determination. Focus placed on scientific writing. Prerequisite: BIOL 220; BIOL 355. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 446

BIOL 447 The Greening of the Earth: Influence of Plants on the Evolution of Terrestrial Ecosystems (5) NW C. STROMBERG
Examines the evolution of terrestrial ecosystems focusing on how abiotic factors such as climate change have shaped the evolution of vegetation on earth, and how the evolution of vegetation has influenced the evolution of animals. Introduces paleoecological techniques using Burke Museum plant fossils. Prerequisite: either BIOL 354 or ESS 213. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 447

BIOL 448 Mammalogy (5) NW S. SANTANA MATA
Studies evolutionary patterns, ecology, behavior, physiology, and taxonomy of mammals. Relies on a comparative, systems approach to understand the major trends and mechanisms maintaining the diversity in form and function in mammals. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350, BIOL 354, or BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 448

BIOL 449 Applied Phylogenetics (3) NW A. LEACHE
Emphasizes the estimation of species trees - multilocus estimates of species or population relationships as opposed to genealogies of alleles. Provides students with the computation and bioinformatics skills needed to apply new phylogenetic techniques that can accommodate larger, more complex data sets. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 354.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 449

BIOL 450 Vertebrate Paleontology (5) NW C. SIDOR
Examines fossil vertebrate life, focusing on systematics and morphology of major lineages (fish, reptiles, bird, and early mammal relatives). Examines fossil and modern vertebrates from the Burke Museum collection in the lab. Weekend field trip. Prerequisite: either BIOL 354, BIOL 452, BIOL 453 or ESS 100. Offered: jointly with ESS 452.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 450

BIOL 451 Invertebrate Paleontology (5) NW
Important larger invertebrate groups; morphology, classification, stratigraphic distribution, evolution, paleoecology. Offered: jointly with ESS 451.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 451

BIOL 452 Vertebrate Biology (5) NW
The biology of vertebrate animals, emphasizing their diversity, adaptations, and evolutionary history. Introduces aspects of behavior, physiology, morphology, and ecology that emerge from the comparative study of vertebrates. Laboratory includes local field trips, films, and introduction to regional vertebrate fauna. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: SpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 452

BIOL 453 Comparative Anatomy of Vertebrates (5) NW
Comparison of the structure of vertebrate organ systems: integument, skeletal, muscle, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular, urinary, and reproductive, with an emphasis on evolutionary trends. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350 or BIOL 452. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 453

BIOL 454 Entomology (5) NW
Covers the biology of terrestrial arthropods, with emphasis on insects. Includes structure, classification, physiology, and ecology of insects. Interrelationships of insects and man. Requires at least one weekend field trip. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 454

BIOL 457 Chemical Communication (3) NW J. RIFFELL
Exploration of how chemical signals are produced, transported, and influence behavior of microbes, plants, and animals. Synthetic approach, with emphasis on applications to cell biology, neurobiology, and ecology. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.5 in either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140, or a minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 350.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 457

BIOL 458 Behavioral Genetics (4) NW
Role of genetics in determining variation in human and animal behavior and in regulating behavioral development. Techniques for quantifying genetic variation, behavioral effects, and gene expression. Prerequisite: either minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200, 2.0 in PSYCH 300, or 2.0 in BIOL 180. Offered: jointly with PSYCH 458.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 458

BIOL 459 Developmental Neurobiology (3) NW M. BOSMA
Invertebrate and vertebrate examples illustrate the mechanisms used in constructing nervous systems. Focus on the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie questions about the basis of neuronal diversity, axonal pathfinding and target recognition, synaptogenesis, and activity-dependent plasticity. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 350 or BIOL 355. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 459

BIOL 460 Mammalian Physiology (3) NW
Principles of mammalian physiology with special emphasis on the cardiac, respiratory, renal systems taught at the organ and organ systems level. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 2.5 either BIOL 350 or NBIO 301.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 460

BIOL 461 Neurobiology (3) NW
Broad examination of integrative mechanisms in central nervous system function, with emphasis on sensory processing, plasticity, and control of behavior. Examples are taken from a variety of animal groups. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 350; either PHYS 115 or PHYS 122. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 461

BIOL 462 Advanced Animal Physiology (3) NW
Physiology at levels of organisms and behavior, organ systems, and cells - an evolutionary and integrative perspective. Organismal physiology: metabolism, temperature, locomotion, osmoregulation, respiration, circulation, digestion. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 350 or NBIO 301. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 462

BIOL 463 Advanced Animal Physiology Lab (3) NW
Experimental design and techniques, data analysis, written reports. Original project labs and experiments in physiology. Prerequisite: BIOL 462, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 463

BIOL 465 Comparative Endocrinology (3) NW
Hormonal integration of living processes at all levels in animals: molecules, cells, organs, organisms, populations. Prerequisite: BIOL 350.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 465

BIOL 466 Pathobiology of Emerging Diseases (3) NW L. ZEMAN
Examination of the causes, alterations in cellular function, and remediation of emerging diseases in plants and animals from a global perspective. Includes weekly scientific papers. Prerequisite: either BIOL 350, BIOL 355, BIOL 356, or BIOL 380.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 466

BIOL 467 Comparative Animal Physiology (3) NW
Studies organismal function in an evolutionary context. Uses a variety of animals to highlight transitions in metabolism, muscle function, respiration, circulation, digestion, excretion, and ion regulation. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 467

BIOL 468 Medical Physiology (3) D. WEIGLE
Students deepen their understanding of human physiology and pathophysiology by performing in-depth analyses of actual medical cases. Cases are chosen to illustrate the mechanisms of frequently encountered diseases and the clinical presentation of affected patients. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140; BIOL 350.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 468

BIOL 469 Evolution and Medicine (3) NW C. BERGSTROM
Responds to new applications of evolutionary biology in medicine, now being discovered at an accelerating rate. Emphasizes medically relevant aspects of evolutionary biology. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 469

BIOL 470 Biogeography (4) NW
Analysis of historical and ecological determinants of current and past distributions of organisms. Integrates techniques developed by taxonomists, paleontologists, geologists, evolutionists, ecologists, and biogeographers to elucidate relationships between geographical distributions and continental drift, ecological interactions, climate, and dispersal abilities of organisms. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 470

BIOL 471 Plant Ecology (5) NW
Basic concepts of plant ecology, including studies of the environment, plant-environment interactions, populations, communities, and ecosystems. Laboratory includes one weekend field trip, laboratory and greenhouse experiments, and an introduction to ecological problem solving. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 471

BIOL 472 Community Ecology (5) NW
Covers the complexity of biological communities as influenced by biotic and abiotic factors, as well as the impact of human activities (like global warming) on communities. Prerequisite: BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 472

BIOL 473 Limnology (3) NW
Ecology, conservation, and management of inland aquatic ecosystems. Explores interactions among biological, chemical, and physical features of lakes and other aquatic habitats. Prerequisite: BIOL 180. Offered: jointly with FISH 473; A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 473

BIOL 474 Limnology Laboratory (2) NW
Examination of biota of fresh waters, survey of limnological methods, analysis of data, and writing of scientific papers. Prerequisite: BIOL 473/FISH 473/CEE 462, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: jointly with CEE 463/FISH 474; A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 474

BIOL 475 Intensive Field Experience in Biology (5) NW
Introduces field methods and research in various areas of biology, e.g., paleontology, ecology, climate change, and mycology. Includes two or more weeks away from campus at field site. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 475

BIOL 476 Conservation Biology (5) NW
Explores biological, managerial, economic, and ethical concepts affecting survival of species. Applications of ecology, biogeography, population genetics, and social sciences for the preservation of species in the face of widespread global habitat modification, destruction, and other human activities. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.5 in BIOL 180, B BIO 180, TESC 120, or BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 476

BIOL 477 Seminar in Marine Biology (3) NW Roccap
Reviews current research in marine biology. Emphasizes critical readings and discussion of primary literature. Prerequisite: FISH 250, OCEAN 250, or BIOL 250; Q SCI 381, STAT 220, or STAT 311. Offered: jointly with FISH 477/OCEAN 477; W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 477

BIOL 478 Topics in Sustainable Fisheries (3, max. 9) I&S/NW
Seminar series featuring local, national, and internationally known speakers in fisheries management and conservation. Conservation/restoration in practice. Pre-seminar discussion section focusing on select readings. Topics may include harvest management, whaling, by-catch, salmon, marine protected areas, introduced species, citizen action, co-management, and marine ethics. Offered: jointly with ENVIR 478/FISH 478.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 478

BIOL 479 Research in Marine Biology (1-15, max. 15)
Individual research on topics in marine biology. Research projects supervised by an individual faculty member. Projects may include laboratory work, fieldwork, and literature surveys. Prerequisite: BIOL 250/FISH 250/OCEAN 250; Q SCI 381. Offered: jointly with FISH 479/OCEAN 479; AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 479

BIOL 480 Field Ecology (4) NW P. BOERSMA
Field projects examining ecological and behavioral topics such as foraging and social behavior, species interactions, and structure of terrestrial and aquatic communities. Two weekend fieldtrips required. Prerequisite: either BIOL 356 or a minimum grade of 3.0 in either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 480

BIOL 481 Experimental Evolutionary Ecology (5) NW B. KERR
Explores experimentally approachable questions in ecology and evolution through lectures, laboratory, and field experiments. Topics may include evolution of bacterial antibiotic resistance, the evolution of virulence, seed predation, plant biodiversity, and others. Prerequisite: either BIOL 180, B BIO 180, or TESC 120. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 481

BIOL 482 Advanced Experimental Evolutionary Ecology (2-5, max. 15) NW B. KERR
Working in pairs or independently, students pursue supervised original field or laboratory research projects. Projects span three academic quarters, with project development beginning in autumn, research continuing in winter, and culminating in spring with production of a scientific paper. Prerequisite: BIOL 481, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 482

BIOL 483 Senior Seminar in Paleobiology (1, max. 6)
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: either BIOL 443, BIOL 447, BIOL 450/ESS 452, BIOL 451/ESS 452, ESS 450, BIO A 388, or ARCHY 470.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 483

BIOL 484 Senior Seminar in Evolution and Systematics (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: BIOL 354.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 484

BIOL 485 Senior Seminar in Cellular, Molecular and Developmental Biology (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either BIOL 350, BIOL 354, BIOL 355, BIOL 356, BIOC 405, BIOC 406, BIOC 440, BIOC 441, or BIOC 442.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 485

BIOL 486 Senior Seminar in Ecology (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 486

BIOL 487 Senior Seminar in Conservation Biology (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: BIOL 356.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 487

BIOL 488 Senior Seminar in Physiology (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: BIOL 350.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 488

BIOL 489 Senior Seminar in Plant Biology (1-3, max. 9) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion. Prerequisite: BIOL 220; recommended: one upper-division course emphasizing plant biology.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 489

BIOL 490 Undergraduate Seminar (1-3, max. 6) NW
Supervised readings and group discussion of selected topics of broad biological significance. Prerequisite: either BIOL 220, B BIO 220, or TESC 140.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 490

BIOL 492 The Teaching of Biology (2)
Basic course in the teaching of biology in the secondary school. Designed to help pre-service teachers identify useful laboratory techniques, materials, and content for the teaching of pre-college biology. Special attention to current issues in biology education. Required for biology students in Teacher Certification Program.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 492

BIOL 493 Study Abroad - Advanced Biology (1-15, max. 15) NW
For participants in UW Study Abroad program. Specific content varies and must be individually evaluated. Credit does not apply to major requirements without approval.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 493

BIOL 495 Undergraduate Research in Paleobiology (1-5, max. 10) NW
Individually arranged undergraduate research for students in the field of paleobiology.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 495

BIOL 497 Special Topics in Biology (1-5, max. 10) NW
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 497

BIOL 498 Library Research (1-5, max. 10)
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 498

BIOL 499 Undergraduate Research (1-20, max. 20)
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 499

BIOL 500 Topics in Biology (1-3, max. 16)
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 500

BIOL 501 Topics in Biological Instruction (1-2, max. 10)
Focused discussion of on-going research in instructional methods for life science courses. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 501

BIOL 502 Grant Writing (3)
Introduces the steps of compiling a successful grant proposal, using the NSF graduate fellowship as a template. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 502

BIOL 505 Problems in Biological Instruction (1-3, max. 10)
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 505

BIOL 506 Scientific Manuscript Writing (4)
Introduces the writing of scientific articles. Students write a scientific manuscript, cover letter, and identify a journal for submission. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 506

BIOL 511 Topics in Mathematical Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Discussion of current topics in mathematical biology.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 511

BIOL 520 Departmental Seminar (1, max. 18)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 520

BIOL 533 Advanced Organismal Biology (9)
Advanced study and research in organismal biology. Emphasizes marine organisms and habitats of the San Juan Archipelago. Includes individual research projects. Prerequisite: permission of Director of Friday Harbor Laboratories. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 533

BIOL 536 Comparative Invertebrate Embryology (9)
Diversity in developmental patterns in major marine taxa. Analysis of evolutionary changes in development. Emphasis on observation of live embryos and larvae. Prerequisite: permission of Director of Friday Harbor Laboratories; recommended: courses in invertebrate zoology and developmental biology. Offered: SpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 536

BIOL 539 Marine Phycology (9)
Field and laboratory studies of marine algae of the San Juan Archipelago with emphasis on seaweed diversity, identification, and the role of algae in marine ecosystems. Offered at Friday Harbor Laboratories.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 539

BIOL 540 Seminar in Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in cell, molecular, and/or developmental biology, review of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 540

BIOL 541 Topics in Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Focused discussion of on-going cell, molecular, or developmental biology research occurring in the instructor's laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 541

BIOL 542 Analysis of Development (1-3, max. 15)
Analysis of structural, physiological, and molecular levels of developmental processes, including gametogenesis, fertilization, cell and tissue movements, induction, and cytodifferentiation. Graduate standing or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 542

BIOL 543 Biology of Drosophila Seminar (1, max. 12)
Weekly presentation by participants of classical literature, current literature, and research in the molecular biology, developmental biology, neurobiology, and genetics of Drosophila. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 543

BIOL 544 Evolution of Photosynthesis (3) R. CATTOLICO
Focuses on the evolution of photosynthetic eukaryotic cells. Interactive discussions target the morphological, genetic, and biochemical consequences of progenitor cell specialization within extant taxa.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 544

BIOL 545 MCD-Biology Professional Skills Seminar (1, max. 6) D. PARICHY
Presentations of past or planned research in molecular, cellular, or developmental biology. Participants give presentations in either professional-meeting or chalk-talk formats. Uses written and oral evaluations by audience to focus on scientific content as well as presentation skills. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 545

BIOL 550 Seminar in Evolution and Systematics (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in evolution and/or systematics, reviews of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 550

BIOL 551 Topics in Evolution and Systematics (1-3, max. 24)
Focused discussion of on-going research in evolution and/or systematics occurring in the instructor's laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 551

BIOL 552 Advanced Evolution ([2-5]-, max. 10)
Successful analytical approaches to understanding evolutionary patterns and the processes that generate them, examined by using a wide array of empirical and theoretical tools. Survey of how theory, modeling, and statistics can be applied to observations and experiments in evolutionary biology.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 552

BIOL 553 Applied Phylogenetics (3) A. LEACHE
Survey of methods for estimating phylogenetic trees. Covers theory and use of phylogeny in comparative biology. Computer labs focus on analyzing real data to answer relevant biological questions. Strong computer skills necessary. Includes weekly discussions of scientific papers and an individual research project. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.5 in BIOL 354.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 553

BIOL 555 Introduction to Graduate Research in Paleobiology (1)
Introduction to paleobiology techniques and resources. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with ESS 558; A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 555

BIOL 557 Vertebrate Paleontology (5)
Examines the biology of vertebrate animals, emphasizing their diversity, adaptations, and evolutionary history. Introduces aspects of behavior, physiology, morphology, and ecology that emerge from the comparative study of vertebrates. Laboratory includes local field trips and introduction to regional vertebrate fauna. Offered: jointly with ESS 557.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 557

BIOL 560 Seminar in Ecology (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in ecology, reviews of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 560

BIOL 561 Topics in Ecology (1-3, max. 15)
Focused discussion of on-going research in ecology occurring in the instructor's laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 561

BIOL 563 Experimental Evolutionary Ecology (5) B. KERR
Explores experimentally approachable questions in ecology and evolution through lectures, lab, and field experiments. Topics may include evolution of bacterial antibiotic resistance, the evolution of virulence, seed predation, plant biodiversity, and others. Corequisite: BIOL 481. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 563

BIOL 564 Advanced Experimental Evolutionary Ecology (2-5, max. 15) B. KERR
Working independently or paired with an undergraduate in BIOL 482, students pursue supervised original field or laboratory research projects. Projects span three academic quarters, with project development beginning in autumn, research continuing in winter, and culminating in spring with production of a scientific paper. Prerequisite: BIOL 563, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 564

BIOL 565 Community Ecology (5) J. HILLE RIS LAMBERS
Covers the complexity of biological communities as influenced by biotic and abiotic factors, as wells as the impact of human activities, like global warming, on communities.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 565

BIOL 567 Topics in Advanced Ecology (3, max. 6)
Discusses literature on active research areas or controversies in different branches of ecology. Offered: jointly with FISH 567/SEFS 567; W.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 567

BIOL 570 Seminar in Conservation Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in conservation biology, reviews of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics. tes.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 570

BIOL 571 Topics in Conservation Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Focused discussion of on-going research in conservation biology occurring in the instructor's laboratory. Graduate status required, or permission of instructor for undergraduates.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 571

BIOL 580 Seminar in Physiology (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in physiology, reviews of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 580

BIOL 581 Topics in Physiology (1-3, max. 15)
Focused discussion of on-going research in physiology occurring in the instructor's laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 581

BIOL 583 Physiological Mechanisms of Histology (5) L. ZEMAN
Develops recognition of cellular structures with correlations to normal physiology and disease states. Lab projects cover harvesting, sectioning, staining, and mounting tissue. Includes weekly scientific papers.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 583

BIOL 590 Seminar in Organismal Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Weekly discussions of past and current scientific literature in organismal biology, reviews of the state of the field, and presentation of research results. Discussions may cover the full breadth of the discipline or focus on selected topics.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 590

BIOL 591 Topics in Organismal Biology (1-3, max. 15)
Focused discussion of on-going research in organismal biology occurring in the the instructor's laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 591

BIOL 600 Independent Study or Research ([1-10]-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 600

BIOL 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 700

BIOL 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: BIOL 800

CS&SS 221 Statistical Concepts and Methods for the Social Sciences (5) NW, QSR
Develops statistical literacy. Examines objectives and pitfalls of statistical studies; study designs, data analysis, inference; graphical and numerical summaries of numerical and categorical data; correlation and regression; and estimation, confidence intervals, and significance tests. Emphasizes social science examples and cases. (Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 220, STAT 221, STAT 311, STAT 221/CS&SS 221/SOC 221, and ECON 311.) Offered: jointly with SOC 221/STAT 221; AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 221

CS&SS 320 Evaluating Social Science Evidence (5) I&S, QSR
A critical introduction to the methods used to collect data in social science: surveys, archival research, experiments, and participant observation. Evaluates "facts and findings" by understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the methods that produce them. Case based. Offered: jointly with SOC 320/STAT 320.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 320

CS&SS 321 Case-Based Social Statistics I (5) I&S, QSR
Introduction to statistical reasoning for social scientists. Built around cases representing in-depth investigations into the nature and content of statistical and social-science principles and practice. Hands-on approach: weekly data-analysis laboratory. Fundamental statistical topics: measurement, exploratory data analysis, probabilistic concepts, distributions, assessment of statistical evidence. Offered: jointly with SOC 321/STAT 321; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 321

CS&SS 322 Case-Based Social Statistics II (5) I&S, QSR
Continuation of CS&SS 321/SOC 321/STAT 321. Progresses to questions of assessing the weight of evidence and more sophisticated models including regression-based methods. Built around cases investigating the nature and content of statistical principles and practice. Hands-on approach: weekly data analysis laboratory. Prerequisite: CS&SS 321/SOC 321/STAT 321, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with SOC 322/STAT 322; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 322

CS&SS 501 Advanced Political Research Design and Analysis (5)
Testing theories with empirical evidence. Examines current topics in research methods and statistical analysis in political science. Content varies according to recent developments in the field and with interests of instructor. Offered: jointly with POL S 501.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 501

CS&SS 503 Advanced Quantitative Political Methodology (5)
Theory and practice of likelihood inference. Includes probability modeling, maximum likelihood estimation, models for binary responses, count models, sample selection, and basis time series analysis. Offered: jointly with POL S 503.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 503

CS&SS 504 Applied Regression (4)
Least squares estimation. Hypothesis testing. Interpretation of regression coefficients. Categorical independent variables. Interactions. Assumption violations: outliers, residuals, robust regression; nonlinearity, transformations, ACE, CART; nonconstant variance. Variable selection and model averaging. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, STAT 390/MATH 390, STAT 421, STAT 481/ECON 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, or SOC 425; recommended: MATH 308. Offered: jointly with STAT 504.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 504

CS&SS 505 Review of Mathematics for Social Scientists (1)
Reviews basic mathematical skills needed for a meaningful understanding of elementary statistics, data analysis, and social science methodology. Overview of core knowledge required for graduate courses in quantitative methods in social sciences. Topics include discrete mathematics, differential and integral calculus, review of matrix algebra, and basic probabilistic and statistical concepts. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with SOC 512; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 505

CS&SS 506 Computer Environments for the Social Sciences (1)
Familiarizes graduate students in the social sciences with modern environments for statistical computing. Provides an overview of available resources and a description of fundamental tools used in quantitative courses and doctoral research. Topics include interfaces to web-based resources, UNIX-based computing, and major statistical packages (R, SPLUS, and SAS). Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 506

CS&SS 507 Methodology: Quantitative Techniques in Sociology (3)
Applied regression analysis with emphasis on interactive computer graphics techniques and interpretation. Application to typical sociological problems. Offered: jointly with SOC 506.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 507

CS&SS 508 Introduction to R for Social Scientists (1)
Familiarizes students with the R environment for statistical computing (http://www.r-project.org). R is a freely available, multi-platform, and powerful program for analysis and graphics similar to S-PLUS. Covers the basics of organizing, managing, and manipulating social science data; basic applications; introduction to programming; links to other major statistical packages. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 508

CS&SS 509 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics: Econometrics I (5) NW
Examines methods, tools, and theory of mathematical statistics. Covers, probability densities, transformations, moment generating functions, conditional expectation. Bayesian analysis with conjugate priors, hypothesis tests, the Neyman-Pearson Lemma. Likelihood ratio tests, confidence intervals, maximum likelihood estimation, Central limit theorem, Slutsky Theorems, and the delta-method. (Credit allowed for only one of STAT 390, STAT 481, and ECON 580.) Prerequisite: STAT 311/ECON 311; either MATH 136 or MATH 126 with either MATH 308 or MATH 309; recommended: MATH 324. Offered: jointly with ECON 580/STAT 509; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 509

CS&SS 510 Maximum Likelihood Methods for the Social Sciences (5) C. ADOLPH
Introduces maximum likelihood, a more general method for modeling social phenomena than linear regression. Topics include discrete, time series, and spatial data, model interpretation, and fitting. Prerequisite: POL S 501/CS&SS 501; POL S 503/CS&SS 503. Offered: jointly with POL S 510; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 510

CS&SS 526 Structural Equation Models for the Social Sciences (3)
Structural equation models for the social sciences, including specification, estimation, and testing. Topics include path analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, linear models with latent variables, MIMIC models, non-recursive models, models for nested data. Emphasizes applications to substantive problems in the social sciences. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506 or equivalent; recommended: either CS&SS 505 and CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with SOC 529.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 526

CS&SS 527 Survey Research Methods (4) A. MOKDAD
Provides students with skills in questionnaire development and survey methods. Students develop a questionnaire and design a survey research proposal on a health-related or social topic. Prerequisite: either HSERV 511/HSERV 513; BIOST 517/BIOST 518; or EPI 512/EPI 513, which may be taken concurrently, or permission of instructor. Students should have a survey project in mind. Offered: jointly with G H 533/HSERV 527.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 527

CS&SS 529 Sample Survey Techniques (3)
Design and implementation of selection and estimation procedures. Emphasis on human populations. Simple, stratified, and cluster sampling; multistage and two-phase procedures; optimal allocation of resources; estimation theory; replicated designs; variance estimation; national samples and census materials. Prerequisite: either STAT 421, STAT 423, STAT 504, QMETH 500, BIOST 511, or BIOST 517, or equivalent; or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 529/STAT 529.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 529

CS&SS 536 Analysis of Categorical and Count Data (3)
Analysis of categorical data in the social sciences. Binary, ordered, and multinomial outcomes, event counts, and contingency tables. Focuses on maximum likelihood estimations and interpretations of results. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505 and CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with SOC 536/STAT 536; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 536

CS&SS 544 Event History Analysis for the Social Sciences (5)
Examines life course research using event-history analysis with applications to the substantive areas of household dynamics, family formation and dissolution, marriage, cohabitation, and divorce, migration histories, residential mobility, and housing careers. Examines continuous- and discrete-time longitudinal models during practical laboratory sessions.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 544

CS&SS 560 Hierarchical Modeling for the Social Sciences (4)
Explores ways in which data are hierarchically organized, such as voters nested within electoral districts that are in turn nested within states. Provides a basic theoretical understanding and practical knowledge of models for clustered data and a set of tools to help make accurate inferences. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506 or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505, CS&SS 506 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with SOC 560/STAT 560.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 560

CS&SS 564 Bayesian Statistics for the Social Sciences (4)
Statistical methods based on the idea of probability as a measure of uncertainty. Topics covered include subjective notion of probability, Bayes' Theorem, prior and posterior distributions, and data analysis techniques for statistical models. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506 or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505; CS&SS 506. Offered: jointly with STAT 564.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 564

CS&SS 565 Inequality: Current Trends and Explanations (3)
Discussion of recent growth in economic inequality in the United States and competing explanations for these new trends through examination of labor market demographics, industrial composition and restructuring, and the broader political context that impacts policies like minimum wage, strength of unions, and foreign trade. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: either CS&SS 505 and CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with SOC 565.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 565

CS&SS 566 Causal Modeling (4)
Construction of causal hypotheses. Theories of causation, counterfactuals, intervention vs. passive observation. Contexts for causal inference: randomized experiments; sequential randomization; partial compliance; natural experiments, passive observation. Path diagrams, conditional independence, and d-separation. Model equivalence and causal under-determination. Prerequisite: course in statistics, SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505, CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with STAT 566.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 566

CS&SS 567 Statistical Analysis of Social Networks (4)
Statistical and mathematical descriptions of social networks. Topics include graphical and matrix representations of social networks, sampling methods, statistical analysis of network data, and applications. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505; CS&SS 506. Offered: jointly with STAT 567.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 567

CS&SS 568 Game Theory for Social Scientists (5)
Studies non-cooperative game-theory and provides tools to derive appropriate statistical models from game-theoretic models of behavior. Equilibrium concepts, learning, repeated games and experimental game theory. Prerequisite: MATH 112, MATH 124, or MATH 134; STAT 311/ECON 311 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with ECON 568; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 568

CS&SS 569 Visualizing Data (4)
Explores techniques for visualizing social science data to complement graduate training methods. Emphasis on principles and perception of visualization, novel exploration and presentation of data and statistical models, and implementation of recommended techniques in statistics packages. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, and SOC 506; recommended: CS&SS 505 and CS&SS 506.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 569

CS&SS 589 Multivariate Data Analysis for the Social Sciences (4, max. 8) Erosheva
Provides social scientists with an introduction to multivariate analysis techniques and the knowledge to carry them out. Focuses on statistical methods that explore relationships between observed variables. Topics include principal components, cluster, factor, latent class analysis. Prerequisite: SOC WL 587, SOC WL 588, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with SOC WL 589; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 589

CS&SS 590 CSSS Seminar (1, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 590

CS&SS 594 Special Topics in Social Science and Statistics (1-5, max. 30)
Topics vary. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CS&SS 594

CHEM 110 Introduction to General Chemistry (3-5) NW
Introduction to general chemistry with an emphasis on developing problem solving skills. Covers basic concepts of chemistry along with the mathematics required for quantitative problem solving. For students without high school chemistry or with limited mathematics background. Successful completion of CHEM 110 prepares students to enroll in CHEM 142. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 110

CHEM 120 Principles of Chemistry I (5) NW, QSR
First course in a three-quarter overview of general chemistry, organic chemistry, and biochemistry. Not for students majoring in biochemistry, chemistry, or engineering. Includes matter and energy, chemical nomenclature, chemical reactions, stoichiometry, modern atomic theory, chemical bonding. Laboratory. Only 5 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following: CHEM 120, CHEM 142, CHEM 145. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 120

CHEM 142 General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
For science and engineering majors. Atomic nature of matter, stoichiometry, gas laws, chemical equilibrium, solubility, and acids and bases. Includes laboratory. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 142, CHEM 145 (5 credits). Cannot be taken for credit if CHEM 120 already taken. Recommended: high school chemistry; placement into MATH 120 or higher. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 142

CHEM 145 Honors General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
CHEM 145 and CHEM 155 cover material in CHEM 142, CHEM 152, and CHEM 162. Includes laboratory. Prerequisite: either MATH 124 or MATH 134, either of which may be taken concurrently; score of 66% on HCHEMC placement test, score of 3, 4 or 5 on AP Chemistry exam, or IB score of 5, 6, or 7 on high level chemistry exam. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 142, CHEM145 (5 credits); CHEM 145, CHEM 155, CHEM 162 (10 credits). Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 145

CHEM 152 General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
Aqueous equilibria, titrations, buffers, energy, enthalpy and thermochemistry, spontaneity, entropy and free energy, electrochemistry, quantum mechanics, and atomic theory. Includes laboratory. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 1.7 in either CHEM 142, or CHEM 145. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 152, CHEM 155 (5 credits). Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 152

CHEM 155 Honors General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
Continuation of CHEM 145. Includes laboratory. Together CHEM 145 and CHEM 155 cover material in CHEM 142, CHEM 152, and CHEM 162. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 152 or CHEM 155 (5 credits); CHEM 145, CHEM 155, CHEM 162 (10 credits). Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.2 in CHEM 145. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 155

CHEM 162 General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
General bonding and molecular-orbital theory, chemical kinetics, liquids and solids, properties of solutions, the elements in groups 1A-4A, the elements in groups 5A-8A, transition metals and coordination chemistry, and organic chemistry. Includes laboratory. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 1.7 in CHEM 152. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 162, CHEM 165 (5 credits). Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 162

CHEM 165 Honors General Chemistry (5) NW, QSR
Introduction to systematic inorganic chemistry: representative elements, metals, and nonmetals. Includes coordination complexes, geochemistry, and metallurgy. Additional material on environmental applications of basic chemistry presented. Includes laboratory. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 162, CHEM 165 (5 credits); CHEM 165, CHEM 312 (5 credits). Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.2 in CHEM 155. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 165

CHEM 190 Freshman Discovery Seminar in Chemistry (5) NW
Introduces incoming freshman to research basics and scholarly inquiry skills used in the study of chemistry.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 190

CHEM 198 Tutorial Study (2, max. 6) NW
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 198

CHEM 199 Special Problems (1-6, max. 6)
Research in chemistry. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 199

CHEM 220 Principles of Chemistry II (5) NW
Second course in a three-quarter overview of general chemistry, organic chemistry, and biochemistry. Not for students majoring in biochemistry, chemistry, or engineering. Introduction to organic chemistry including organic compounds, , functional groups, aromaticity, and stereochemistry. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 1.7 in either CHEM 120 or CHEM 142. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 220

CHEM 221 Principles of Chemistry III (5) NW
Third course in a three-quarter overview of general chemistry, organic chemistry, and biochemistry. Not for students majoring in biochemistry, chemistry, or engineering. Introduction to biochemistry including biomolecular structure, proteins, nucleic acids, biochemical cycles, and cellular energetics. Only 5 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following: CHEM 221, CHEM 223, CHEM 237, CHEM 335. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in CHEM 220. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 221

CHEM 223 Organic Chemistry - Short Program (4) NW
First of a two-quarter lecture series in organic chemistry, for those who elect not to complete the CHEM 237, CHEM 238, CHEM 239 sequence. Introduction to structure, nomenclature, properties, and reactions of the main functional families of organic compounds. Stereochemistry and spectroscopy. No more than 5 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 221, CHEM 223, CHEM 237, CHEM 335. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 1.7 in either CHEM 152 or CHEM 155; recommended: CHEM 162. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 223

CHEM 224 Organic Chemistry - Short Program (4) NW
Continuation of CHEM 223. Structure, nomenclature, properties, and reactions of aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acid derivatives, amines, carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids. No laboratory accompanies this course, but CHEM 241 laboratory may be taken concurrently. No more than 4 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 224, CHEM 239, CHEM 337. Prerequisite: 1.7 in CHEM 223. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 224

CHEM 237 Organic Chemistry (4) NW
First course for students planning to take three quarters of organic chemistry. Structure, nomenclature, reactions, and synthesis of the main types of organic compounds. No organic laboratory accompanies this course. No more than 5 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 221, CHEM 223, CHEM 237, CHEM 335. Prerequisite: a minimum grade of 1.7 in either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 237

CHEM 238 Organic Chemistry (4) NW
Second course for students planning to take three quarters of organic chemistry. Further discussion of physical properties and transformations of organic molecules, especially aromatic and carbonyl compounds. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 238, CHEM 336 (4 credits). Prerequisite: either 1.7 in CHEM 237 or 1.7 in CHEM 335. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 238

CHEM 239 Organic Chemistry (3) NW
Third course for students planning to take three quarters of organic chemistry. Polyfunctional compounds and natural products, lipids, carbohydrates, amino acids, proteins, and nucleic acids. Includes introduction to membranes, enzyme mechanisms, prosthetic groups, macromolecular conformations and supramolecular architecture. No more than 4 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 224, CHEM 239, CHEM 337. Prerequisite: either 1.7 in CHEM 238 or 1.7 in CHEM 336. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 239

CHEM 241 Organic Chemistry Laboratory (3) NW
Introduction to organic laboratory techniques. Preparation of representative compounds. Designed to be taken with CHEM 224 or CHEM 238. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 241, CHEM 346 (3 credits). Prerequisite: minimum 1.7 grade in either CHEM 223, CHEM 237, or CHEM 335; minimum grade of 1.7 in either CHEM 224, CHEM 238, or CHEM 336, any of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 241

CHEM 242 Organic Chemistry Laboratory (3) NW
Preparations and qualitative organic analysis. Designed to be taken with 239. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 242, CHEM 347 (3 credits). Prerequisite: minimum 1.7 grade in either CHEM 241 or CHEM 346; minimum 1.7 grade in either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 242

CHEM 291 Study Abroad - Chemistry (1-15, max. 15) NW
For student in the UW study abroad program. Content varies and is individually evaluated. Credit does not apply to major degree requirements without departmental approval.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 291

CHEM 299 Special Problems and Report Writing (1-6, max. 6)
Research in chemistry and/or study in the chemical literature. Requires writing a scientific report. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 299

CHEM 312 Inorganic Chemistry (3) NW
The periodic table: chemistry of representative and transition elements. Aqueous chemistry, solid state chemistry, and everyday aspects of inorganic chemistry emphasized. Not intended for students who have completed CHEM 165. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 165, CHEM 312 (5 credits). Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162; either CHEM 224, CHEM 238, or CHEM 336. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 312

CHEM 317 Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory (4) NW
Experimental exploration of the periodic table. Techniques of preparation and characterization of inorganic compounds. Handling of air-sensitive materials and gases. Prerequisite: either CHEM 165 or CHEM 312; either CHEM 242 or CHEM 347. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 317

CHEM 321 Quantitative Analysis (5) NW
Introduction to chemical analysis, including gravimetric, volumetric, spectrophotometric, and potentiometric analyses. Laboratory computer use included. Prerequisite: either CHEM 155, CHEM 162, or CHEM 164. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 321

CHEM 335 Honors Organic Chemistry (4) NW
For chemistry majors and otherwise qualified students planning three or more quarters of organic chemistry. Structure, nomenclature, reactions, and synthesis of organic compounds. Theory and mechanism of organic reactions. Studies of biomolecules. No organic laboratory accompanies this course. No more than 5 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 221, CHEM 223, CHEM 237, CHEM 335. Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 335

CHEM 336 Honors Organic Chemistry (4) NW
For chemistry majors and otherwise qualified students planning three or more quarters of organic chemistry. Structure, nomenclature, reactions, and synthesis of organic compounds. Theory and mechanism of organic reactions. Studies of biomolecules. No more than 4 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 238, CHEM 336. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.2 in CHEM 335. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 336

CHEM 337 Honors Organic Chemistry (4) NW
For chemistry majors and otherwise qualified students planning three or more quarters of organic chemistry. Structure, nomenclature, reactions, and synthesis of organic compounds. Theory and mechanism of organic reactions. Studies of biomolecules. Includes introduction to membranes, enzyme mechanisms, prosthetic groups, macromolecular conformations, and supramolecular architecture. No more than 4 credits can be counted toward graduation from the following course groups: CHEM 239, CHEM 337. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.2 in CHEM 336. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 337

CHEM 346 Organic Chemistry Honors Laboratory (3) NW
To accompany CHEM 336. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 241, CHEM 346 (3 credits). Prerequisite: 1.7 in CHEM 335; minimum 1.7 grade in CHEM 336, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 346

CHEM 347 Organic and Qualitative Organic Honors Laboratory (3) NW
Continuation of CHEM 346. To accompany CHEM 337. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 242, CHEM 347 (3 credits). Prerequisite: minimum 1.7 grade in CHEM 336; minimum 2.2 grade in CHEM 346; minimum 1.7 grade in CHEM 337, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 347

CHEM 399 Undergraduate Research (*, max. 12)
Research in chemistry. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 399

CHEM 410 Radiochemistry Laboratory (2) NW
Introductory general service course for students planning further work in nuclear or tracer applications. Safety procedures, detection and measurement of nuclear radiation, radiochemical and tracer techniques. Prerequisite: CHEM 418, which may be taken concurrently.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 410

CHEM 416 Transition Metals (3) NW
Survey of selected key topics in the chemistry of the transition metals, including emphasis on the structure, bonding, and reactivity of major classes of compounds. Prerequisite: either CHEM 165 or CHEM 312; either CHEM 453, CHEM 455, or CHEM 475, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 416

CHEM 417 Organometallic Chemistry (3) NW
Chemistry of the metal-carbon bond for both main group and transition metals. Structure and reactivity with applications to organic synthesis and catalysis. Prerequisite: either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337; CHEM 416. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 417

CHEM 418 Nuclear Chemistry (3) NW
Natural radioactivity, nuclear systematics and reactions, radioactive decay processes, stellar nucleosynthesis, applications of radioactivity. Prerequisite: either CHEM 453, CHEM 455, or CHEM 475.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 418

CHEM 419 Bioinorganic Chemistry (3) NW
Description of transition metal-containing systems found in biology. Structural and electronic properties and reactivity of metalloproteins, metalloenzymes, and metallocofactors. Methods used to probe and model metal sites by spectroscopic and synthetic techniques. Prerequisite: either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337; CHEM 416. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 419

CHEM 426 Instrumental Analysis (3) NW
Introduction to modern instrumental methods of chemical analysis, including chromatography, optical and mass spectroscopy, electrochemistry and flow injection analysis. Basic concepts of transducers, spectrometers, mass analysis, separation sciences, and computerized data acquisition and reduction. Includes laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM 321. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 426

CHEM 428 Bioinstrumental Analysis (3) NW
Modern instrumental methods of bioanalysis of DNA and proteins, including agarose gel electrophoresis, PCR, Sanger sequencing for nucleic acid analysis and ELISA, SDS-PAGE, and LC/MS-MS analysis of proteins. Mass analysis, separation sciences, and bioinformatics tools. Includes laboratory. No credit allowed if BIOC 426 taken. Prerequisite: either BIOC 405 or BIOC 440. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 428

CHEM 429 Chemical Separation Techniques (3) NW
Introduction to modern separation techniques such as gas chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography, electrophoresis, and field flow fractionation. Prerequisite: either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337; either CHEM 241, CHEM 321, or CHEM 346. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 429

CHEM 436 Chemical Biology (3) NW
Protein structure and forces that hold proteins together; mechanistic enzymology, basics of how enzymes work as catalysts; protein-ligand binding, both theory and measurement approaches; fundamentals of protein analysis including gels and immunological methods; activity-based protein profiling. DNA synthesis along with methods for directed DNA mutagenesis and recombinant protein production. Prerequisite: either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337; recommended: either BIOC 405 or BIOC 440.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 436

CHEM 452 Physical Chemistry for Biochemists I (3) NW
General equilibrium thermodynamics emphasizing biochemical applications: ligand binding, biological oxidation-reduction reactions, membranes, active transport, colligative properties, and surface tension. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following: 452, 456 (3 credits). Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162; either MATH 125 or MATH 134; either PHYS 115 or PHYS 122. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 452

CHEM 453 Physical Chemistry for Biochemists II (3) NW
Continuation of CHEM 452. Includes transport properties, enzyme kinetics, introduction to quantum mechanics, spectroscopy, and classical statistical mechanics. Prerequisite: either CHEM 452 or CHEM 456; either MATH 126 or MATH 135; either PHYS 116 or PHYS 123; recommended: MATH 307; MATH 308. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 453

CHEM 455 Physical Chemistry (3) NW
Introduction to quantum chemistry and spectroscopy. Theory of quantum mechanics presented at an elementary level and applied to the electronic structure of atoms and molecules and to molecular spectra. Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162; either MATH 126 or MATH 136; either PHYS 116 or PHYS 123; recommended: MATH 307; MATH 308. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 455

CHEM 456 Physical Chemistry (3) NW
Chemical thermodynamics. Laws of thermodynamics presented with applications to phase equilibria, chemical equilibria, and solutions. No more than the number of credits indicated can be counted toward graduation from the following course group: CHEM 452, CHEM 456 (3 credits). Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162; either MATH 126 or MATH 136; either PHYS 116 or PHYS 123; recommended: MATH 307. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 456

CHEM 457 Physical Chemistry (3) NW
Introduction to statistical mechanics, kinetic theory, and chemical kinetics. Prerequisite: either CHEM 455 or CHEM 475; either CHEM 456 or CHEM E 326. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 457

CHEM 458 Air Pollution Chemistry (4) NW
Global atmosphere as a chemical system emphasizing physical factors and chemical processes that give rise to elevated surface ozone, particulate matter, and air toxics; international issues of air pollution transport and changing tropospheric background composition; and regulatory control strategies and challenges. Aimed at science and engineering majors. Recommended: either ATM S 358 or CHEM 162, MATH 126, and PHYS 123. Offered: jointly with ATM S 458; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 458

CHEM 460 Spectroscopic Molecular Identification (3) NW
Basic theory of spectral techniques - infrared and ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy, NMR, and mass spectrometry - with emphasis on spectral interpretation skills needed for the elucidation of structure, conformation, and dynamics in organic and biological chemistry. Prerequisite: either CHEM 224, CHEM 239, or CHEM 337; recommended: either CHEM 455 or CHEM 475. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 460

CHEM 461 Physical Chemistry Laboratory (3) NW
Physical measurements in chemistry. Vacuum techniques, calorimetry, spectroscopic methods, electrical measurements. Prerequisite: either CHEM 453, or both CHEM 455 and CHEM 456, or both CHEM 456 and CHEM 475; recommended: CHEM 457. Offered: ASpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 461

CHEM 462 Techniques of Synthetic Organic Chemistry (2-3) NW
Laboratory techniques of synthetic organic chemistry. Vacuum distillation, multistep synthesis, air sensitive reagents, photochemistry, chromatography, and separation techniques. Prerequisite: either CHEM 242 or CHEM 347; CHEM 460 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 462

CHEM 463 Spectroscopic Techniques for Structural Identification (2) NW
Laboratory techniques of spectroscopic analysis for structural determination using UV, IR, NMR, mass spectroscopy. Prerequisite: CHEM 460. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 463

CHEM 464 Computers in Data Acquisition and Analysis (3) NW
Introduction to use of the computer in the chemistry laboratory. Principles of microcomputers and their use for such problems as data acquisition, noise reduction, and instrument control. Prerequisite: either CHEM 453, CHEM 455, or CHEM 475; MATH 136, or both MATH 307 and MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 464

CHEM 465 Computations in Chemistry (3) NW
Computer calculations on color graphics workstations applied to problems in chemistry. Numerical methods and algorithms for calculating classical dynamics, quantum wavefunctions, wavepacket propagation, chemical kinetics. Use of computer programs for calculating electronic wavefunctions, molecular conformations, simulations of liquids and solids. Prerequisite: either CHEM 455 or CHEM 475, either of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 465

CHEM 475 Honors Physical Chemistry (3) NW
Introduction to quantum chemistry, spectroscopy. Theory of quantum mechanics applied more rigorously than in CHEM 455. Application of quantum mechanics to electronic structure of atoms and molecules. Computer software used to solve problems. Prerequisite: either CHEM 155 or CHEM 162; either MATH 126 or MATH 136; either PHYS 116 or PHYS 123; recommended: MATH 307; MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 475

CHEM 484 Materials Chemistry (3) NW
Overview of basic principles, techniques, and applications associated with solid materials. Topics include description of crystals, examples of crystal structures, structural analysis, band structures of solid materials, preparation of materials, materials for microelectronics, and materials for information technology. Prerequisite: CHEM 453 or CHEM 455. Offered: jointly with MSE 484; ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 484

CHEM 485 Electronic Structure and Application of Materials (3) NW
Introduction to electronic structure theory of solids from a chemical perspective, including band theory and the free electron model, with an emphasis in the second half of the quarter on modern trends in research in inorganic materials in the bulk and on the nanometer scale. Prerequisite: CHEM 455. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 485

CHEM 486 Electronic Dynamics in Organic and Inorganic Materials (3) NW
Energy and charge transfer; exciton migration and charge transport; photophysical dynamics in optoelectronic and kinetic processes in electrochemical energy conversion. Prerequisite: CHEM 455. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 486

CHEM 491 Study Abroad - Advanced Chemistry (1-15, max. 15) NW
For students in the UW study abroad program. Content varies and is individually evaluated. Credit does not apply to major degree requirements without departmental approval.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 491

CHEM 499 Undergraduate Research and Report Writing (*, max. 12)
Research in chemistry and/or study in the chemical literature. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 499

CHEM 500 Grant Proposal and Scientific Writing (1)
Introduces steps in compiling a successful grant proposal and writing scientific articles, personal statements, research summaries, and procuring recommendation letters, using the NSF graduate fellowship as a guide. Students gain experience in peer review processes as assessment of current scientific literature. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 500

CHEM 501 Readings in Chemistry (1, max. 9)
Individual meetings with faculty to discuss readings (journal articles, book chapters, proceedings) in the chemical sciences. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 501

CHEM 508 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry (3, max. 9)
Discussion of selected applications of physical techniques to the study of inorganic molecules. Topics include group theory, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR and ESR), vibrational spectroscopy (IR and Raman), electronic spectroscopy, magnetism, and electrochemistry. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 508

CHEM 510 Current Problems in Inorganic Chemistry (3, max. 9)
Primarily for doctoral candidates in inorganic chemistry. Current topics (e.g., bioinorganic, advanced organometallic, materials and solid state, advanced inorganic spectroscopy). See department for instructor and topics during any particular quarter. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 510

CHEM 520 Current Problems in Analytical Chemistry (3, max. 9)
Primarily for doctoral candidates in analytical chemistry. Current topics (e.g., flow injection analysis, mass spectrometry, and advanced radiochemistry). See department for instructor and topics during any particular quarter. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 520

CHEM 522 Atomic and Molecular Analytical Spectroscopy (3)
Quantitative analysis of atomic and molecular species, using all forms of electromagnetic radiation, electrons, and gaseous ions.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 522

CHEM 523 Geochemical Cycles (4)
Descriptive, quantitative aspects of earth as biogeochemical system. Study of equilibria, transport processes, chemical kinetics, biological processes; their application to carbon, sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorus, other elemental cycles. Stability of biogeochemical systems; nature of human perturbations of their dynamics. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ATM S 508/OCEAN 523.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 523

CHEM 529 Chemical Separation Techniques (3)
Introduction to modern separation techniques such as gas chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography, electrophoresis, and field flow fractionation. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 529

CHEM 530 Advanced Organic Chemistry (3)
Fundamental aspects of organic structures and transformations. Structure and basicity of carbanions, substitution reactions, elimination reactions, nucleophilic addition and addition/elimination reactions, condensation reactions, structure and rearrangements of carbocations, electrophilic addition, electrophilic substitutions, neighboring group effects. Prerequisite: CHEM 337. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 530

CHEM 531 Advanced Organic Chemistry (3)
Synthetic organic chemistry. Discussion of practical methods for the synthesis of complex organic molecules with an emphasis on strategy and the control of stereochemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 530. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 531

CHEM 532 Advanced Organic Chemistry (3)
Chemical biology. Application of chemical methods to the study of biological processes that occur in cells. Prerequisite: CHEM 530 and CHEM 531. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 532

CHEM 540 CURRENT PROBLEMS IN ORGANIC CHEMISTRY (1-3, max. 12)
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 540

CHEM 550 Introduction to Quantum Chemistry (3)
Origins and basic postulates of quantum mechanics, solutions to single-particle problems, angular momentum and hydrogenic wave functions, matrix methods, perturbation theory, variational methods. Prerequisite: CHEM 455. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 550

CHEM 551 Introduction to Quantum Chemistry (3)
Electronic structure of many-electron atoms and molecules, vibration and rotation levels of molecules, effects of particle exchange, angular momentum and group theory, spectroscopic selection rules. Prerequisite: CHEM 550. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 551

CHEM 552 Statistical Mechanics (3)
General theorems of statistical mechanics, relation of the equilibrium theory to classical thermodynamics, quantum statistics, theory of imperfect gases, lattice statistics and simple cooperative phenomena, lattice dynamics and theory of solids, liquids, solutions, and polymers, time-dependent phenomena and mechanisms of interaction. Prerequisite: CHEM 455 and CHEM 456 (concurrent registration permitted) or equivalent. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 552

CHEM 553 Statistical Mechanics (3)
General theorems of statistical mechanics, relation of the equilibrium theory to classical thermodynamics, quantum statistics, theory of imperfect gases, lattice statistics and simple cooperative phenomena, lattice dynamics and theory of solids, liquids, solutions, and polymers, time-dependent phenomena and mechanisms of interaction. Prerequisite: CHEM 552. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 553

CHEM 560 Current Problems in Physical Chemistry (1-3, max. 12)
Primarily for doctoral candidates in physical chemistry. A discussion of topics selected from active research fields. See department for instructor and the topic during any particular quarter.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 560

CHEM 564 Organic Electronic and Photonic Materials/Polymers (3)
Physical and material concepts determining properties of organic electronic and photonic materials. Discusses electronic structure, physico-chemical characterization, and device application. Includes introduction of electronic band structure of polymers, electrically conducting polymers; organic nonlinear optical electroluminescent materials; polymer optical fibers; tow-photon absorption materials for 3-D microfabrication. Offered: jointly with MSE 560; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 564

CHEM 565 Computations in Chemistry (3)
Covers computer calculations applied to problems in chemistry. Introduces to numerical methods and algorithms for calculating classical dynamics, quantum wavefunctions, wavepacket propagation, and chemical kinetics. Uses computer programs for calculating electronic wavefunctions, molecular conformations, and simulations of liquids and solids. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 565

CHEM 581 Preparation for Second-Year Exam (3-, max. 9)
Preparation for examination. Open only to students accepted for doctoral work in chemistry, in their second year of study. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 581

CHEM 585 Electronic Structure and Application of Materials (3) NW
Introduction to electronic structure theory of solids from a chemical perspective, including band theory and the free electron model, with an emphasis in the second half of the quarter on modern trends in research in inorganic materials in the bulk and on the nanometer scale. Recommended: working knowledge of electron wave functions, the particle in a box model, and atomic orbital interactions. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 585

CHEM 590 Seminar in General Chemistry (1, max. 18)
For chemistry graduate students only. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 590

CHEM 591 Seminar in Inorganic Chemistry (1, max. 18)
For chemistry graduate students only. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 591

CHEM 592 Seminar in Analytical Chemistry (1, max. 18)
For chemistry graduate students only. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 592

CHEM 593 Seminar in Organic Chemistry (1, max. 18)
For chemistry graduate students only. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 593

CHEM 595 Seminar in Physical Chemistry (1, max. 18)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 595

CHEM 597 Nanotechnology Seminar (1, max. 18)
Emphasizes frontier research in nanoscience and nanotechnology and on intellectual interactions within the nanotechnology community. Presented by experts in the field, with most being from other institutions. Prerequisite: graduate standing and permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 518; AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 597

CHEM 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 600

CHEM 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 700

CHEM 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM 800

ECON 200 Introduction to Microeconomics (5) I&S, QSR
Analysis of markets: consumer demand, production, exchange, the price system, resource allocation, government intervention. Recommended: MATH 111. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 200

ECON 201 Introduction to Macroeconomics (5) I&S, QSR
Analysis of the aggregate economy: national income, inflation, business fluctuations, unemployment, monetary system, federal budget, international trade and finance. Prerequisite: ECON 200; recommended: MATH 111. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 201

ECON 230 Economics of Fisheries and Oceans (5) I&S/NW, QSR C. ANDERSON
Examines how and why people and businesses make choices that lead to over-fishing, hypoxic zones, and oil spills in aquatic environments. Applies economic principles to understand how alternative policies might change these decisions, and how distributional effects influence politically feasible solutions. Offered: jointly with FISH 230; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 230

ECON 235 Introduction to Environmental Economics (5) I&S/NW S. RABOTYAGOV
Introduces environmental and natural resource economics. Discusses fundamental economic concepts, including markets and private property. Includes basic tools used in the economic assessment of environmental problems and applies these methods to key environmental issues. Offered: jointly with ENVIR 235/ESRM 235; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 235

ECON 299 Study Abroad: Economics (3-5, max. 10) I&S
Lower-division economics courses taken for which there are no direct University of Washington equivalents, taken through a University of Washington study abroad program.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 299

ECON 300 Intermediate Microeconomics (5) I&S
Analysis of decisions by individuals and by firms and of outcomes in factor and product markets. Policy issues and applications. Prerequisite: ECON 200; either MATH 112, MATH 124, MATH 127, MATH 134, or MATH 145. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 300

ECON 301 Intermediate Macroeconomics (5) I&S
Analysis of the determinants of the aggregate level of employment, output, prices, and income of an economy. Policy issues and applications with special reference to current monetary and fiscal policy. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 201; 2.0 in ECON 300. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 301

ECON 315 Study Abroad: Economics (3-5, max. 10) I&S
Upper-division economics courses for which there are no direct University of Washington equivalents, taken through a University of Washington study abroad program.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 315

ECON 382 Introduction to Econometrics (5) NW
Applies statistical methods to economic data: estimating economic relationships using regression analysis and testing hypotheses involving economic behavior. Uses econometric software. Open to economics majors only. Cannot be taken for credit if ECON 482 taken previously. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 382

ECON 399 Economics Internship (1-5, max. 10)
Academic work completed in conjunction with an economics-related internship. Faculty supervision required. Does not apply toward major. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 399

ECON 400 Advanced Microeconomics (5) NW
Explores the rigorous development of mathematical models used by economists to explain the behavior of consumers, firms, and markets. Topics include comparative statics for consumption theory, duality in production, and decision-making under uncertainty. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; MATH 126; recommended: minimum grade of 3.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 400

ECON 401 Advanced Macroeconomics (5) NW
Application of mathematics to macroeconomics. Possible topics include economic dynamics and growth, rational expectations, real business cycle models, and New Keynesian approach. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301; either MATH 126, MATH 129, or MATH 136; recommended: minimum grade of 3.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 401

ECON 402 Microeconomics: Methods and Applications (5) I&S
Generalizations and extensions of the course models of competition and monopoly taught in ECON 300. Topics may include: factor markets and effects of monopoly power; game theory and oligopoly theory; decision making over time; uncertainty and under asymmetric information; contracts and incentives. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 402

ECON 403 The Economics of Property Rights (5) I&S
Property rights as an economic concept. Delineation of rights as a subject of optimization. Formation of contracts to maximize the value of personal property. Formation of organizations to induce efficient use of resources and minimize losses to public domain. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; recommended: two 400-level microeconomics classes.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 403

ECON 404 Industrial Organization and Price Analysis (5) I&S
Analysis of firm behavior in imperfectly competitive markets. Topics include monopoly, oligopoly, product differentiation, entry deterrence, and the role of asymmetric information. Game theoretic tools and empirical evidence used to analyze topics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; recommended: ECON 485.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 404

ECON 405 Analytical Framework for Policy and Decisions (5) NW
Explores how insights form economics and finance can be used to design policies and formulate strategies to solve important real-life problems. Covers a variety of analytics and computational techniques, particularly those directed toward dynamics, uncertainty, and interactive decision problems. Prerequisite: MATH 307; ECON 301; either ECON 400 or ECON 401; either ECON 382, ECON 424, ECON 482, or ECON 483.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 405

ECON 406 Undergraduate Seminar in Economics (5, max. 10) I&S
Provides the undergraduate student an opportunity to apply the tools of economic analysis in a critical examination of theoretical and empirical work. A list of topics is available in the departmental office. Prerequisite: ECON 200.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 406

ECON 409 Undergraduate Seminar in Political Economy (5, max. 10) I&S
Seminar in political economy with focus on Marxian and public choice approaches to political economy. Explores the questions raised by each approach, the assumption(s) and testability of hypotheses, and applies these approaches to a number of problems in political economy. Recommended: ECON 300; POL S 270. Offered: jointly with POL S 409.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 409

ECON 415 Study Abroad: Economics (3-5, max. 10) I&S
Upper-division economics courses for which there are no direct University of Washington equivalents, taken through a University of Washington study abroad program.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 415

ECON 421 Money, Credit, and the Economy (5) I&S
Role of money and the banking system in the United States economy. Relation of money to inflation, interest rates, and business fluctuations. Monetary policy and Federal Reserve System. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 421

ECON 422 Investment, Capital, and Finance (5) I&S
Intertemporal optimization: consumption and portfolio allocation decisions of households, investment and financing decisions of firms. Introduction to financial decisions under uncertainty. Portfolio theory, asset pricing, options, and futures. Financial market institutions and efficiency. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; either ECON 311, STAT 311, MATH 390, STAT 390, or Q SCI 381.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 422

ECON 423 Topics in Financial Economics (5) I&S
Topics of current interest such as regulation of securities markets and valuation of stocks. Allows students to apply tools of economics to real world problems in finance. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301; ACCTG 215.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 423

ECON 424 Computational Finance and Financial Econometrics (5) NW
Covers probability models, data analysis, quantitative, and statistical methods using applications in finance. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; either ECON 311/STAT 311, STAT 341, MATH 390/STAT 390, or Q SCI 381.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 424

ECON 425 Topics in Monetary Economics (5) I&S
Topics include monetary policy and financial markets, two transmission mechanisms, dynamics of monetary policy, targeting interest rates versus targeting the quantity of money, monetary policy under fixed versus flexible exchange rates, inflation targeting, and practices of central banks, i.e., Fed, ECB, BOJ and PBOC. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 425

ECON 426 Advanced Financial Economics (5) I&S
Provides an introduction to financial derivatives and structured financial products, with emphasis on futures, options, credit derivatives, swaps, economic theory, valuation methods, trading strategies, hedging, and securitization. Emphasizes real world applications and developments in the financial market. Prerequisite: ECON 422; MATH 124.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 426

ECON 431 Government and Business (5) I&S
Economic effects of various governmental regulatory agencies and policies. Antitrust legislation as a means of promoting desired market performance. Observed economic effects of policies intended to regulate business practices, control prices, conserve resources, or promote competition. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 431

ECON 435 Natural Resource Economics (5) I&S
Survey of the economics of renewable and nonrenewable resources including fisheries, forest, minerals, and fuels. Optimal trade-offs between benefits and costs of resource use, including trade-offs between current and future use. Effects of property rights on resource use. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 435

ECON 436 Economics of the Environment (5) I&S
Microeconomic analysis of environmental regulation. The problem of social cost, policy instrument choice, enforcement of regulations, methods for damage assessment, and estimating benefits of environmental improvement. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 436

ECON 437 Economics of Biological Resources (5) I&S
Application of economic concepts to biology and biological concepts to economics. Examination of theory of species maximization, parallels in behavior between humans and other biota, animal choices among alternative food sources, games animals play, evidence of risk aversion in animals. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 437

ECON 442 Economics of Human Resource Management (5)
Analyzes the relationship between personnel practices and organizational performance. Economic analysis of compensation policy emphasized. Topics include hiring and retention strategies; incentive pay; relative performance evaluation; teams; promotions; seniority; and organization design. Examines human capital accumulation and labor legislation. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 442

ECON 443 Labor Market Analysis (5) I&S
Determinants of employment and incomes in the United States: analysis of individual and firm decisions and of equilibrium in the labor market. Topics include decisions to work and retire, education and occupation choices, compensation, discrimination, poverty, unemployment, and unions. Examination of policy issues affecting the labor market. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 443

ECON 444 Topics in Labor Market Analysis (5) I&S
In-depth analysis of special topics in the operation of labor markets and public policies affecting incomes and employment. Course content varies by instructor. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 444

ECON 446 Economics of Education (5) I&S
Examines formal education as an investment industry, the economics of human capital investment, and competition among government-owned schools and the non-profit sector. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 446

ECON 447 Economics of Gender (5) I&S, DIV
Microeconomic analysis of the sources of gender differences in earnings, labor force participation, occupational choice, education, and consumption. Economic theories of discrimination, human capital, fertility, and intrahousehold resource allocation. Economics of the family in developed and developing countries. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300. Offered: jointly with GWSS 447.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 447

ECON 448 Population and Development (5) I&S, DIV
Surveys international economic development, with a focus on population issues. Topics include demography, poverty and income inequality, fertility choice and sex selection, household production models and intra-household inequality, parental investments in child health and education, including discrimination against girls, and migration and urbanization. Focuses on evidence-based policy and differential impacts on diverse communities within developing societies. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 448

ECON 450 Public Finance: Expenditure Policy (5) I&S
Application of normative microeconomic theory to analysis of government expenditures. Rationale for government economic activity, collective choice, public goods, and externalities, income redistribution, public sector pricing, and specific expenditure programs. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 450

ECON 451 Public Finance: Tax Policy (5) I&S
Microeconomics of taxation: efficiency, incidence, effect on distribution of income, personal and corporate income taxes, sales and consumption taxes, taxation of property and estates. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 451

ECON 452 Economic Theory as Applied to the Political System (5) I&S
Explanation and evaluation of the political system, using elementary economics theory. Topics include alternative voting rules, the political effectiveness of various types of groups, causes and consequences of logrolling, and bureaucratic organizations. Prerequisite: ECON 300. Offered: jointly with POL S 416.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 452

ECON 454 Cost-Benefit Analysis (5) I&S
Theory and practice of cost-benefit analysis of public sector projects and policies. Welfare criteria, investment criteria, shadow prices, social discount rate, marginal-willingness-to-pay for non-market goods, social risk, and special topics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 454

ECON 455 Microeconomics of Public Policy (5) I&S
Topics include general equilibrium analysis of efficiency and equity, income and substitution effects, analysis of alternative welfare programs, intergovernmental grants, price discrimination, price controls, rationing, industry regulation, and public goods. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 455

ECON 464 Financial Crisis (5) I&S
Causes, effects, and cures for financial crisis traced through history from the Tulip Bubble, to the Great Depression, to the East Asian Crisis of 1997, and beyond. Explores the original work of Fisher, Keynes, Friedman, and Krugman, among others. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 464

ECON 470 Economic History of the Jews (5) I&S
Explores the history, economics, and politics of mercantile minorities, the Jews. Topics include the economics of religion, migration, Zionism, Arab-Israeli relations, and Israeli high-tech. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300. Offered: jointly with JSIS C 470.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 470

ECON 471 International Trade (5) I&S
Theory of comparative advantage and different models of international trade. Trade and welfare. Factor mobility and trade flows. Economic integration. Theory and practice of commercial policy. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 471

ECON 472 International Macroeconomics (5) I&S
International monetary theory and open economy macroeconomics. Balance of payments and foreign exchange markets. Different exchange rate arrangements and their adjustment mechanisms. Money and international capital movements. Policy issues. The international monetary system. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 472

ECON 473 Topics in International Trade (5) I&S
Advanced theory of trade and analysis of government trade policies. International trade and factor mobility. Theory of commercial policy. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301; ECON 471.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 473

ECON 475 Economics of the European Union (5) I&S
Analysis of economic issues relating to the European union. Explores the institutional aspects, the attempt to coordinate social and economic policies - welfare, employment, commercial, fiscal, and monetary - and the economic linkages between the European Union and the rest of the world. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 475

ECON 482 Econometric Theory and Practice (5) NW
Applies statistical modeling to empirical work in economics. Focuses on regression analysis; derivations of regression estimators and their properties; and applied computer work in estimating multiple regression models. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; either ECON 311/STAT 311, MATH 390/STAT 390, or Q SCI 381; recommended: MATH 124.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 482

ECON 483 Econometric Applications (5) NW
Provides opportunity to learn econometric model building for a particular problem while applying the theory learned in various courses to specific economic cases. Estimate, test, and forecast economic models. Extensive use of the computer and econometric programs. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301; either ECON 311/STAT 311, STAT 341, MATH 390/STAT 390, or Q SCI 381.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 483

ECON 484 Econometrics and Data Science (5) NW
Advanced continuation of ECON 482 and ECON 483. Traditional topics: structural modeling, non-linear and logistic regression, the LASSO, and non-traditional topics: regression and classification trees, bagging, boosting, and random forests. Computer based, uses the R language, emphasizing interpretation, not formal proofs. Prerequisite: ECON 482; MATH 126; recommended: ECON 483.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 484

ECON 485 Game Theory with Applications to Economics (5) NW
Introduction to the main concepts of game theory: strategy, solution concepts for games, strategic behavior, commitment, cooperation, and incentives. Application to economics oligopoly theory, bargaining theory, and contract theory. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 485

ECON 486 Economics of Information (5) I&S
Basic models of decision making and strategic interaction in the presence of imperfect and incomplete information. Information issues in market exchange and in hierarchical settings. Includes adverse selection, moral hazard, signaling, and screening. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 300; may not be taken for credit if credit received for ECON 402; recommended: either ECON 404 or ECON 485.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 486

ECON 490 Comparative Economic Systems (5) I&S
Study of resource allocation, growth, and income distribution in capitalist, market socialist, and centrally planned economies. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 490

ECON 491 Issues in Economic Development (5) I&S
Examines factors contributing to the economic problems of developing countries and possible solutions. Theory and applications in economic development and international trade. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 491

ECON 492 Macroeconomics of Emerging Markets (5) I&S
Examines how the standard macroeconomic models that are used in industrial countries can be modified to help understand the macroeconomic issues facing emerging and developing countries. Covers topics including fiscal policy, inflation targeting, financial market stability, natural resource dependence, and institutional reforms. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 492

ECON 494 Economy of Japan (5) I&S
Analysis of the economic growth of Japan since about 1850 to the present. The reasons for rapid industrialization, various effects of sustained economic growth, and significant contemporary issues are investigated. Prerequisite: ECON 201.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 494

ECON 495 Economies in Transition (5) I&S
Analysis of the interaction between institutional change and economic performance in the transforming socialist economies. Resources allocation in command economies. Market institutions. Primary focus on empirical comparison of growth, productivity, and social institutions in former socialist economies in Asia, Europe, and Central Asia. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in ECON 301.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 495

ECON 496 Honors Seminar (5) I&S
Honors and other students in high standing have the opportunity to develop research techniques, to pursue topics in breadth and depth, and to apply tools of economic analysis to selected topics in economic theory and current issues of national and international economic policy.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 496

ECON 497 Honors Directed Study (5)
Students write their honors thesis on the topic chosen in the Honors Seminar working under the previously arranged supervision of a faculty adviser. Prerequisite: ECON 496
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 497

ECON 498 Senior Seminar (5) I&S
Advanced undergraduate research in economics. Students formulate some underlying economic issue, organize its study, gather necessary information, and analyze results. Does not satisfy graduation requirement for the major. Prerequisite: ECON 301; one 400-level ECON course; recommended: two 400-level ECON courses.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 498

ECON 499 Undergraduate Research (1-5, max. 10)
May not be applied toward an advanced degree.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 499

ECON 500 Microeconomic Analysis I (4)
Duality and comparative statics analysis. Consumer and firm behavior. Uncertainty. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 500

ECON 501 Microeconomic Analysis II (4)
General equilibrium and welfare economics. Introduction to game theory. Prerequisite: ECON 500.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 501

ECON 502 Macroeconomic Analysis I (4)
Topics include theories of business cycles, dynamics of price adjustments, consumption theory, dynamic programming, introduction to numerical techniques, and open economy macroeconomics. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 502

ECON 503 Macroeconomic Analysis II (4)
Rational expectations in macroeconomic models. Dynamic optimizing models under uncertainty. Empirical examination of consumption, asset-pricing, and real business cycles. Prerequisite: ECON 502.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 503

ECON 508 Microeconomic Analysis III (4)
Information economics. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 508

ECON 509 Macroeconomic Analysis III (4)
Modern macroeconomic dynamics, presenting a range of approaches based on intertemporal optimization. Representative agent models with special emphasis on the analysis of government policy. More advanced discussion of economic growth. Prerequisite: ECON 502; ECON 503, or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 509

ECON 511 Advanced Microeconomic Theory: Selected Topics (3, max. 12)
Seminar in advanced microtheory. Selected topics of special interest and significance. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 511

ECON 512 Advanced Macroeconomic Theory: Selected Topics (3, max. 12)
Seminar in advanced macrotheory. Selected topics of special interest and significance.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 512

ECON 515 Special Topics in Mathematical Economics (3, max. 12)
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 515

ECON 516 Noncooperative Game Theory (3)
Study of both pure game theory and its applications to such problems as oligopoly pricing, non-cooperative bargaining, entry deterrence, reputation phenomena. Focus on game theory as a modeling tool as opposed to a body of known results. Prerequisite: ECON 508.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 516

ECON 518 Contract Theory (3)
Basic contract theory models, including hidden action and hidden information models. Current developments in contract theory. Prerequisite: ECON 508; ECON 516, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 518

ECON 519 Economics of Contracts and Organizations: Empirics (3) Shi
Critically reviews empirical literature on contracts and organization. Topics include multi-tasking; incentives and risk sharing; relative and subjective performance evaluation; team production; tournament and promotion; efficiency wage; career concern; relational contracts; asset specificity and asset ownership; complexity, uncertainty, asset ownership; adverse selection. Prerequisite: ECON 518; ECON 582, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 519

ECON 520 The Economics of Property Rights (3)
Application of standard economic theory to analyze various forms of property rights as constraints of competition; the costs associated with delineation and enforcement of rights; the costs of negotiating and enforcing contracts for right transfers; resource allocation and income distribution implied by different property right and transaction cost constraints. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 520

ECON 523 Emergence of the State (3)
Using tools of property rights, industrial organization, and game theory, explores the emergence of the state. Specifies conditions conducive to constitutional rule. Analyzes circumstances amenable to state-promoted exchange as opposed to self-enforced agreements. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 523

ECON 525 Computational Economics (3)
Develops a basic understanding of computational techniques used in the economic literature. Demonstrates, with economic examples, when and how these techniques are used and why and how they work. Prerequisite: ECON 580; ECON 581; ECON 582.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 525

ECON 527 Empirics and Theory in Macroeconomics (3)
Explores the integration of empirical and theoretical methods central to macroeconomic research. Exposes students to frontier areas of research to help them learn substantive material and transition to conducting their own independent research. Prerequisite: ECON 502; ECON 503; ECON 509; ECON 581; ECON 582; recommended: ECON 584.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 527

ECON 528 Micro Heterogeneity in Macroeconomics (3)
Discusses the role of heterogeneity in impulse and propagation of shocks to output, consumption, and asset prices. Covers empirical methods and theoretical models to further our understanding of these topics.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 528

ECON 534 Empirical Industrial Organization (3)
Exposes students to the research frontier in empirical industrial organization. Topics include identification in linear models, models of product differentiation, estimation in data-rich environments, static games of imperfect competition, dynamic games of imperfect competition, and computational approaches to large-scale games.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 534

ECON 535 Natural Resource Economics (3)
Half of integrated two-course sequence in environmental and natural resource economics. Dynamic optimization. Nonrenewable resource extraction and exploration, including effects of market structure, uncertainty, and taxation. Renewable resources, including fisheries and forests. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 535

ECON 536 Environmental Economics (3)
Half of integrated two-course sequence in environmental and natural resource economics. Theory of externalities. Normative and positive analysis of policy instruments for environmental management. Theory and methods of measuring environmental and resource values. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 536

ECON 537 Economic Aspects of Marine Policy (3)
Development of pertinent economic concepts and their application to selected topics in marine policy decision making, including maritime policy, OCS oil and gas development, and wetlands management. Prerequisite: SMEA 500 or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with SMEA 537; W.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 537

ECON 538 Economics of Living Marine Resources (3)
Develops pertinent economic concepts and applications for conservation, regulation, and restoration of fisheries and other living resources. Gives special attention to fishery management, including harvest regulation and enforcement, recreational fisheries evaluation, property rights regimes, contemporary issues, and marine protected area management. Offered: jointly with SMEA 538; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 538

ECON 539 ECONOMICS OF NATURAL RESOURCES SEMINAR III (3)
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 539

ECON 541 Labor Economics (3)
Theoretical and empirical analysis of the labor market, focusing on the time allocation and labor supply decisions of individuals and households and the determinants of wages and wage differentials.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 541

ECON 542 Labor Economics (3)
Theoretical and empirical analysis of the labor market. The determinants of labor supply and demand, human capital investment, the pattern of compensation, employment contracts and incentives, unemployment and labor market dynamics.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 542

ECON 543 Population Economics (3)
Analysis of population issues from an economic perspective. Focuses on the study of household behavior in both developed and developing countries. Studies areas including fertility decisions, health and mortality, investment in education, the intra-household allocation of resources, and household structure and marriage. Prerequisite: ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 543

ECON 547 Health Policy Economics (3)
Applies economic theory to selected topics in healthcare, including information, risk and insurance, industry organization, government regulation, and public health issues. Emphasizes policy implications of these applications. Offered: jointly with HSERV 587.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 547

ECON 550 Public Finance: Expenditure Policy (3)
Theory of public finance with emphasis on public expenditures. Social welfare maximization, public goods and externalities, decreasing cost industries, theory of collective choice, second-best analysis. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 550

ECON 551 Public Finance: Tax Policy (3)
Theory of public finance with emphasis on taxation. Second-best analysis, optimal taxation, general equilibrium incidence analysis, issues in personal income taxation and corporate income taxation. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 551

ECON 554 Cost-Benefit Analysis (3)
Covers the theoretical foundations of cost-benefit analysis using graduate microeconomics. Stresses both the conceptual and practical problems encountered in the subject. Emphasis on problem solving and term project. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 554

ECON 568 Game Theory for Social Scientists (5)
Studies non-cooperative game-theory and provides tools to derive appropriate statistical models from game-theoretic models of behavior. Equilibrium concepts, learning, repeated games and experimental game theory. Prerequisite: MATH 112, MATH 124, or MATH 134; STAT 311/ECON 311 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 568; W.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 568

ECON 571 International Trade Theory (3)
Comparative advantage, resource allocation, income distribution, and foreign trade. Different theories of trade, with or without perfect competition and constant returns. International factor mobility. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 571

ECON 572 International Financial and Monetary Economics (3)
Analysis of open economy macro models with emphasis on exchange rates and balance of payments determination. Prerequisite: ECON 502; ECON 503.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 572

ECON 573 International Commercial Policy (3)
Analysis of welfare aspects of international trade and factor mobility. Costs and benefits of protection; implications of different government policies. Import competition and response. Prerequisite: ECON 500; ECON 502.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 573

ECON 574 International Macroeconomics (3)
Surveys recent developments in international macroeconomics, placing particular emphasis on the dynamic aspects. One sector, multisector, and two-country international models discussed. Fiscal issues treated in depth. Stochastic aspects introduced and related to the literature on international real business cycles. Prerequisite: ECON 509 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 574

ECON 575 International Trade and Macroeconomics (3)
Studies how international macroeconomic models with trade microfoundations can shed light on questions in international macroeconomics. Theories are confronted with evidence, and special attention is paid to the roles of produces entry and exit into markets, and of firm heterogeneity, in shaping aggregate fluctuations and economic policy outcomes.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 575

ECON 580 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics: Econometrics I (5) NW
Examines methods, tools, and theory of mathematical statistics. Covers, probability densities, transformations, moment generating functions, conditional expectation. Bayesian analysis with conjugate priors, hypothesis tests, the Neyman-Pearson Lemma. Likelihood ratio tests, confidence intervals, maximum likelihood estimation, Central limit theorem, Slutsky Theorems, and the delta-method. (Credit allowed for only one of STAT 390, STAT 481, and ECON 580.) Prerequisite: STAT 311/ECON 311; either MATH 136 or MATH 126 with either MATH 308 or MATH 309; recommended: MATH 324. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 509/STAT 509; A.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 580

ECON 581 Econometrics II (4)
Methods, tools, and theory of econometrics as the basis for empirical investigation in economics. Specification, testing, and use of econometric models with reference to examples in the literature. Prerequisite: either ECON 580, CS&SS 509, or STAT 509.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 581

ECON 582 Econometrics III (4)
Methods, tools, and theory of econometrics as the basis for empirical investigation in economics. Specification, testing, and use of econometric models with reference to examples in the literature. Prerequisite: ECON 581.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 582

ECON 583 Econometric Theory I (3)
Estimation and testing in linear and nonlinear regression models. Asymptotic theory, bootstrapping. Theoretical developments are reinforced with a variety of empirical examples and applications. Prerequisite: ECON 580, ECON 581, ECON 582 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 583

ECON 584 Econometric Theory II (3)
Continuation of ECON 583. Analysis of stationary and nonstationary, univariate, and multivariate time series models. Emphasis on empirical applications. Prerequisite: ECON 583.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 584

ECON 585 Econometric Theory III (3)
Econometric issues that arise in applied microeconomic research. Topics range from standard methods to recent developments. Focus varies yearly to reflect interests of instructors and students. Prerequisite: ECON 582 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 585

ECON 586 Advanced Applied Time Series Analysis (3)
Time series and empirical macroeconomics with focus on applications of time series analysis to various topics in macroeconomics and finance. Topics include: state-space models and Kalman filter; Markov-switching models and their extensions; Bayesian Gibbs sampling; randomization; and measurement of volatility.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 586

ECON 587 Applied Microeconometrics (3)
Application of microeconomics methods. Topics include treatment effects, instrumental variables, natural experiments, measurement error, panel data, difference-in-differences, sibling data, regression discontinuity, randomization, and quantile regression. Prerequisite: ECON 582.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 587

ECON 588 Bayesian Econometics (3)
Introduces the Bayesian approach to econometrics, and examines how estimation problems can be recast in a Bayesian light. Emphasizes practical technique. Examines Bayesian methods, standard econometric models, and computational issues.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 588

ECON 589 Financial Econometrics (4)
Focuses on statistical modeling of financial time series with an emphasis on modeling volatility and correlation. Topics include statistical properties of asset returns, volatility and correlation modeling, statistical analysis of ultra high frequency time series, and estimation of continuous time models for asset returns. Prerequisite: ECON 583; either ECON 584 or STAT 519.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 589

ECON 590 Analysis of Economies in Transition (3)
Applications of economic analysis to the economic problems of transforming socialist economies. Economic institutions. The role of the state. Privatization and the behavior of decentralized organizations. Integration into the world market. Prerequisite: micro- and macroeconomic theory and permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 590

ECON 591 Microeconomics of Development (3)
Theoretical and empirical analysis of the microeconomics of development. Focuses on the study of household behavior in developing countries and how households respond to missing/imperfect markets. Topics include land access, nutrition and productivity, responses to risks and shocks, credit markets, micro-finance, and program evaluation. Prerequisite: ECON 501.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 591

ECON 592 Development Policy (3)
Theoretical and empirical analysis of macroeconomic policies pursued by developing countries. Topics include the determination of exchange rates and relative prices in small economies; the examination of government spending, taxation, banking, trade, and labor market policies; and the evaluation of market-oriented economic reform programs. Prerequisite: ECON 503; recommended: ECON 591.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 592

ECON 593 Topics in Microeconomics of Development (3)
Builds on ECON 591, studying a variety of special topics in development economics, including health, education, political economy, behavioral development economies, and environmental economics in developing countries.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 593

ECON 594 Economic Growth (3)
Studies various theoretical approaches to the question of why some countries are richer than others using generalizations and extensions of contemporary macroeconomic theory. Discusses the implications of various macroeconomic policies for economic growth. Prerequisite: ECON 502; ECON 503; ECON 509.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 594

ECON 595 Growth and Inequality (3)
Introduces the modern tools of macroeconomic analysis, in the context of several research topics in the areas of growth and inequality. Helps prepare students to undertake research of their own.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 595

ECON 596 Research Issues in Microeconomics (3)
Provides opportunity to practice research and presentation skills in applied and theoretical microeconomics. Students develop and refine thesis topics under faculty supervision. Maximum of 6 credits allowed in 596, 597, and 598 combined. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 596

ECON 599 Research Issues in Econometrics (3)
For second-year students or above who plan to do research in micro-econometrics or nonparametric and semi-parametric econometrics. Provides a forum for state-of-the-art research and an opportunity for students to practice research and presentation skills in applied and theoretical econometrics. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 599

ECON 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 600

ECON 601 Internship (1-9, max. 9)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 601

ECON 602 Teaching Introductory Economics (1)
Examines problems encountered in preparing and presenting courses in introductory economics. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 602

ECON 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ECON 800

MATH 098 Intermediate Algebra (0)
Intermediate algebra equivalent to third semester of high school algebra. Includes linear equations and models, linear systems in two variables, quadratic equations, completing the square, graphing parabolas, inequalities, working with roots and radicals, distance formula, functions and graphs, exponential and logarithmic functions. Instruction provided by community colleges on UW campus. Extra fee required. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 098

MATH 100 Algebra (5)
Similar to the first three terms of high school algebra. Assumes no previous experience in algebra. Open only to students [1] in the Educational Opportunity Program or [2] admitted with an entrance deficiency in mathematics. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 100

MATH 102 Algebra (5)
Similar to the first three terms of high school algebra. Assumes no previous experience in algebra. Open only to students [1] in the Educational Opportunity Program or [2] admitted with an entrance deficiency in mathematics. Prerequisite: MATH 100. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 102

MATH 103 Introduction to Elementary Functions (5)
Continues the study of algebra begun in MATH 100 and MATH 102 with emphasis on functions (polynomial, rational, logarithmic, exponential, and trigonometric). Open only to students who have completed MATH 102. Prerequisite: MATH 102. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 103

MATH 111 Algebra with Applications (5) NW, QSR
Use of graphs and algebraic functions as found in business and economics. Algebraic and graphical manipulations to solve problems. Exponential and logarithm functions; various applications to growth of money. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 098, MATH 102, or MATH 103, a score of 147-150 on the MPT-GS placement test, or a score of 144-163 on the MPT-AS placement test. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 111

MATH 112 Application of Calculus to Business and Economics (5) NW, QSR
Rates of change, tangent, derivative, accumulation, area, integrals in specific contexts, particularly economics. Techniques of differentiation and integration. Application to problem solving. Optimization. Credit does not apply toward a mathematics major. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 111. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 112

MATH 120 Precalculus (5) NW
Basic properties of functions, graphs; with emphasis on linear, quadratic, trigonometric, exponential functions and their inverses. Emphasis on multi-step problem solving. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.5 in MATH 098, minimum grade of 3.0 in MATH 103, a score of 151-169 on the MPT-GS placement test, or score of 145-153 on the MPT-AS placement test. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 120

MATH 124 Calculus with Analytic Geometry I (5) NW, QSR
First quarter in calculus of functions of a single variable. Emphasizes differential calculus. Emphasizes applications and problem solving using the tools of calculus. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.5 in MATH 120, a score of 154-163 on the MPT-AS placement test, or score of 2 on AP test. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 124

MATH 125 Calculus with Analytic Geometry II (5) NW
Second quarter in the calculus of functions of a single variable. Emphasizes integral calculus. Emphasizes applications and problem solving using the tools of calculus. Prerequisite: either minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 124, score of 3 on AB advanced placement test, or score of 3 on BC advanced placement test. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 125

MATH 126 Calculus with Analytic Geometry III (5) NW
Third quarter in calculus sequence. Introduction to Taylor polynomials and Taylor series, vector geometry in three dimensions, introduction to multivariable differential calculus, double integrals in Cartesian and polar coordinates. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 125, a score of 5 on AB advanced placement test, or a score of 4 on BC advanced placement test. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 126

MATH 134 Accelerated [Honors] Calculus (5) NW, QSR
Covers the material of MATH 124, MATH 125, MATH 126; MATH 307, MATH 308. First year of a two-year accelerated sequence. May receive advanced placement (AP) credit for MATH 124 after taking MATH 134. For students with above average preparation, interest, and ability in mathematics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 134

MATH 135 Accelerated [Honors] Calculus (5) NW
Covers the material of MATH 124, MATH125, MATH 126; MATH 307, MATH 308. First year of a two-year accelerated sequence. May receive advanced placement (AP) credit for MATH 125 after taking MATH 135. For students with above average preparation, interest, and ability in mathematics. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 135

MATH 136 Accelerated [Honors] Calculus (5) NW
Covers the material of MATH 124, MATH 125, MATH 126; MATH 307, MATH 308. First year of a two-year accelerated sequence. May not receive credit for both MATH 126 and MATH 136. For students with above average preparation, interest, and ability in mathematics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 136

MATH 197 Problem Solving in Mathematics (2, max. 4) NW
Lectures and problem sessions in mathematics with applications. Enrollment restricted to EOP students only. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 197

MATH 198 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 15)
Independent reading in math. Does not count as credit toward a math major. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 198

MATH 300 Introduction to Mathematical Reasoning (3) NW
Mathematical arguments and the writing of proofs in an elementary setting. Elementary set theory, elementary examples of functions and operations on functions, the principle of induction, counting, elementary number theory, elementary combinatorics, recurrence relations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 125 or MATH 135. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 300

MATH 301 Elementary Number Theory (3) NW
Brief introduction to some of the fundamental ideas of elementary number theory. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126 or MATH 136; minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 301

MATH 307 Introduction to Differential Equations (3) NW
Introductory course in ordinary differential equations. Includes first- and second-order equations and Laplace transform. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 125. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 307

MATH 308 Matrix Algebra with Applications (3) NW
Systems of linear equations, vector spaces, matrices, subspaces, orthogonality, least squares, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, applications. For students in engineering, mathematics, and the sciences. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 126. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 308

MATH 309 Linear Analysis (3) NW
First order systems of linear differential equations, Fourier series and partial differential equations, and the phase plane. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.0 in both MATH 307 and MATH 308 or minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 136. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 309

MATH 324 Advanced Multivariable Calculus I (3) NW
Topics include double and triple integrals, the chain rule, vector fields, line and surface integrals. Culminates in the theorems of Green and Stokes, along with the Divergence Theorem. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126 or MATH 136. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 324

MATH 327 Introductory Real Analysis I (3) NW
Limits and continuity of functions, sequences, series tests, absolute convergence, uniform convergence. Power series, improper integrals, uniform continuity, fundamental theorems on continuous functions, theory of the Riemann integral. Prerequisite: either a minimum grade of 2.0 in both MATH 126 and MATH 300, or minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 136. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 327

MATH 328 Introductory Real Analysis II (3) NW
Limits and continuity of functions, sequences, series tests, absolute convergence, uniform convergence. Power series, improper integrals, uniform continuity, fundamental theorems on continuous functions, theory of the Riemann integral. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 327. Offered: WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 328

MATH 334 Accelerated [Honors] Advanced Calculus (5) NW
Introduction to proofs and rigor; uniform convergence, Fourier series and partial differential equations, vector calculus, complex variables. Students who complete this sequence are not required to take MATH 300, MATH 309, MATH 324, MATH 327, MATH 328, and MATH 427. Second year of an accelerated two-year sequence; prepares students for senior-level mathematics courses. Prerequisite: either minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 136, or minimum grade of 2.0 in both MATH 126 and MATH 307 and MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 334

MATH 335 Accelerated [Honors] Advanced Calculus (5) NW
Introduction to proofs and rigor; uniform convergence, Fourier series and partial differential equations, vector calculus, complex variables. Students who complete this sequence are not required to take MATH 300, MATH 309, MATH 324, MATH 327, MATH 328, and MATH 427. Second year of an accelerated two-year sequence; prepares students for senior-level mathematics courses. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 334. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 335

MATH 336 Accelerated [Honors] Advanced Calculus (5) NW
Introduction to proofs and rigor; uniform convergence, Fourier series and partial differential equations, vector calculus, complex variables. Students who complete this sequence are not required to take MATH 300, MATH 309, MATH 324, MATH 327, MATH 328, and MATH 427. Second year of an accelerated two-year sequence; prepares students for senior-level mathematics courses. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 335. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 336

MATH 340 Abstract Linear Algebra (3) NW
Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in both MATH 300 and MATH 308.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 340

MATH 380 Intermediate Topics in Undergraduate Mathematics (3, max. 12) NW
Covers intermediate topics in undergraduate mathematics.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 380

MATH 381 Discrete Mathematical Modeling (3) NW
Introduction to methods of discrete mathematics, including topics from graph theory, network flows, and combinatorics. Emphasis on these tools to formulate models and solve problems arising in variety of applications, such as computer science, biology, and management science. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either CSE 142, CSE 143, or AMATH 301; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136 or MATH 308. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 381

MATH 390 Statistical Methods in Engineering and Science (4) NW
Concepts of probability and statistics. Conditional probability, independence, random variables, distribution functions. Descriptive statistics, transformations, sampling errors, confidence intervals, least squares and maximum likelihood. Exploratory data analysis and interactive computing. Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 390, STAT 481/ECON 481, and ECON 580. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136. Offered: jointly with STAT 390; AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 390

MATH 394 Probability I (3) NW
Sample spaces; basic axioms of probability; combinatorial probability; conditional probability and independence; binomial, Poisson, and normal distributions. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126 or MATH 136; recommended: either MATH 324 or MATH 327. Offered: jointly with STAT 394; AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 394

MATH 395 Probability II (3) NW
Random variables; expectation and variance; laws of large numbers; normal approximation and other limit theorems; multidimensional distributions and transformations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in STAT/MATH 394. Offered: jointly with STAT 395; WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 395

MATH 396 Probability III (3) NW
Characteristic functions and generating functions; recurrent events and renewal theory; random walk. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with STAT 396; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 396

MATH 398 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 15)
Independent reading in math. Does not count as credit toward a math major. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 398

MATH 402 Introduction to Modern Algebra (3) NW
Elementary theory of groups: Cosets and Lagrange's theorem. Homomorphisms, normal subgroups, quotient groups, and the fundamental isomorphism theorems. Cyclic and symmetric groups. Orders and Cauchy's theorem. Direct products. Automorphisms. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in one of 2.0 MATH 136, MATH 327, MATH 336, or MATH 340. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 402

MATH 403 Introduction to Modern Algebra (3) NW
Elementary theory of rings and fields: polynomial rings. Ideals, homomorphisms, quotients, and fundamental isomorophism theorems. Fields and maximal ideals. Euclidean rings. Field extensions. Algebraic extensions. Vector spaces and degrees of extensions. Adjoining roots of polynomials. Finite fields. Straight edge and compass constructions. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 402. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 403

MATH 404 Introduction to Modern Algebra (3) NW
Topics in algebra chosen from Galois theory, theory of modules, geometric group actions, and the theory of rings and fields. Specific content determined by instructor. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 403. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 404

MATH 407 Linear Optimization (3) NW
Maximization and minimization of linear functions subject to constraints consisting of linear equations and inequalities; linear programming and mathematical modeling. Simplex method, elementary games and duality. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136, MATH 308, or AMATH 352. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 407

MATH 408 Nonlinear Optimization (3) NW
Maximization and minimization of nonlinear functions, constrained and unconstrained; nonlinear programming problems and methods. Lagrange multipliers; Kuhn-Tucker conditions, convexity. Quadratic programming. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 308; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 327 or MATH 334. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 408

MATH 409 Discrete Optimization (3) NW
Maximization and minimization problems in graphs and networks (shortest paths, minimum spanning trees, maximum flows, minimum cost flows); transportation and trans-shipment problems, NP-completeness. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 407. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 409

MATH 411 Introduction to Modern Algebra for Teachers (3) NW
Basic concepts of abstract algebra with an emphasis on problem solving, constructing proofs, and communication of mathematical ideas. Designed for teaching majors; not open for credit to students who have taken MATH 402, MATH 403. Cannot be used as elective credit for either BS program in mathematics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136 or MATH 308. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 411

MATH 412 Introduction to Modern Algebra for Teachers (3) NW
Basic concepts of abstract algebra with an emphasis on problem solving, constructing proofs, and communication of mathematical ideas. Designed for teaching majors; not open for credit to students who have taken MATH 402, MATH 403. Cannot be used as elective credit for either BS program in mathematics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 411. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 412

MATH 420 History of Mathematics (3) NW
Survey of the development of mathematics from its earliest beginnings through the first half of the twentieth century. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 126. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 420

MATH 424 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3) NW
The real number system; field, order, and LUB axioms. Metric spaces: Euclidean space. Bolzano-Weierstrass property. Sequences and limits of sequences. Cauchy sequences and completeness. The Heine-Borel Theorem. Uniform continuity. Connected sets and the intermediate value theorem. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 328 or MATH 335. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 424

MATH 425 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3) NW
One-variable differential calculus: chain rule, inverse function theorem, Rolle's theorem, intermediate value theorem, Taylor's theorem, and intermediate value theorem for derivatives. Multivariable differential calculus: mean value theorem, inverse and implicit function theorems, and Lagrange multipliers. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in both MATH 308 and MATH 424; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 324 or MATH 335. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 425

MATH 426 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3) NW
Lebesgue measure on the reals. Construction of the Lebesgue integral and its basic properties. Monotone Convergence Theorem, Fatou's Lemma, and Dominated Convergence Theorem. Integration of series. Continuity and differentiability theorems for functions defined by integrals. Introduction to general measures and integration. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 425. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 426

MATH 427 Complex Analysis (3) NW
Complex numbers; analytic functions; sequences and series; complex integration; Cauchy integral formula; Taylor and Laurent series; uniform convergence; residue theory; conformal mapping. Topics chosen from: Fourier series and integrals, Laplace transforms, infinite products, complex dynamics; additional topics chose by instructor. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 327 or MATH 335; recommended: MATH 328. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 427

MATH 428 Complex Analysis (3) NW
Continuation of MATH 427. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 427. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 428

MATH 441 Topology (3) NW
Metric and topological spaces, convergence, continuity, finite products, connectedness, and compactness. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 328 or MATH 335. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 441

MATH 442 Differential Geometry (3) NW
Examines curves in the plane and 3-spaces, surfaces in 3-space, tangent planes, first and second fundamental forms, curvature, the Gauss-Bonnet Theorem, and possible other selected topics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 308; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 335, MATH 324 and MATH 441, or MATH 324 and MATH 424. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 442

MATH 443 Differential Geometry (3) NW J. ARMS, E. DEVINATZ
Further examines curves in the plane and 3-spaces, surfaces in 3-space, tangent planes, first and second fundamental forms, curvature, the Gauss-Bonnet Theorem, and possible other selected topics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 443

MATH 444 Geometry for Teachers (3) NW
Concepts of geometry from multiple approaches; discovery, formal and informal reasoning, transformations, coordinates, exploration using computers and models. Topics selected from Euclidean plane and space geometry, spherical geometry, non-Euclidean geometries, fractal geometry. Designed for teaching majors. Cannot be used as elective credit for either BS program in mathematics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 126; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136 or MATH 308; minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 300. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 444

MATH 445 Geometry for Teachers (3) NW
Concepts of geometry from multiple approaches; discovery, formal and informal reasoning, transformations, coordinates, exploration using computers and models. Topics selected from Euclidean plane and space geometry, spherical geometry, non-Euclidean geometries, fractal geometry. Designed for teaching majors. Cannot be used as elective credit for either BS program in mathematics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 444. Offered: SpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 445

MATH 461 Combinatorial Theory (3) NW
Selected topics from among: block designs and finite geometries, coding theory, generating functions and other enumeration methods, graph theory, matroid theory, combinatorial algorithms, applications of combinatorics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 461

MATH 462 Combinatorial Theory (3) NW
Selected topics from among: block designs and finite geometries, coding theory, generating functions and other enumeration methods, graph theory, matroid theory, combinatorial algorithms, applications of combinatorics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in MATH 461. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 462

MATH 464 Numerical Analysis I (3) NW
Basic principles of numerical analysis, classical interpolation and approximation formulas, finite differences and difference equations. Numerical methods in algebra, systems of linear equations, matrix inversion, successive approximations, iterative and relaxation methods. Numerical differentiation and integration. Solution of differential equations and systems of such equations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136, MATH 308, or MATH 335 Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 464

MATH 465 Numerical Analysis II (3) NW
Basic principles of numerical analysis, classical interpolation and approximation formulas, finite differences and difference equations. Numerical methods in algebra, systems of linear equations, matrix inversion, successive approximations, iterative and relaxation methods. Numerical differentiation and integration. Solution of differential equations and systems of such equations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136, MATH 308, or MATH 335. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 465

MATH 466 Numerical Analysis III (3) NW
Basic principles of numerical analysis, classical interpolation and approximation formulas, finite differences and difference equations. Numerical methods in algebra, systems of linear equations, matrix inversion, successive approximations, iterative and relaxation methods. Numerical differentiation and integration. Solution of differential equations and systems of such equations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 136, both MATH 307 and MATH 308, or MATH 335.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 466

MATH 480 Advanced Topics in Undergraduate Mathematics (3, max. 12)
Covers advanced topics in undergraduate mathematics.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 480

MATH 491 Introduction to Stochastic Processes (3) NW
Random walks, Markov chains, branching processes, Poisson process, point processes, birth and death processes, queuing theory, stationary processes. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with STAT 491; A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 491

MATH 492 Stochastic Calculus for Option Pricing (3) NW
Introductory stochastic calculus mathematical foundation for pricing options and derivatives. Basic stochastic analysis tools, including stochastic integrals, stochastic differential equations, Ito's formula, theorems of Girsanov and Feynman-Kac, Black-Scholes option pricing, American and exotic options, bond options. Prerequisite: either MATH 394 or STAT 394; either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with STAT 492; W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 492

MATH 496 Honors Senior Thesis (1-5) NW
Problem seminar for Honors students. Cannot be repeated for credit. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 496

MATH 498 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 15)
Reading and lecture course intended for special needs of advanced students. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 498

MATH 499 Undergraduate Research (8) NW
Summer research opportunity for undergraduates. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 499

MATH 504 Modern Algebra (5)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering group theory; field theory and Galois theory; commutative rings and modules, linear algebra, theory of forms; representation theory, associative rings and modules; commutative algebra and elementary algebraic geometry. Prerequisite: MATH 404 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 504

MATH 505 Modern Algebra (5)
Continuation of MATH 504. Prerequisite: MATH 504.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 505

MATH 506 Modern Algebra (5)
Continuation of MATH 505. Prerequisite: MATH 505.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 506

MATH 507 Algebraic Geometry (3)
First quarter of a two-quarter sequence covering the basic theory of affine and projective varieties, rings of functions, the Hilbert Nullstellensatz, localization, and dimension; the theory of algebraic curves, divisors, cohomology, genus, and the Riemann-Roch theorem; and related topics. Prerequisite: MATH 506.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 507

MATH 508 Algebraic Geometry (3)
Continuation of MATH 507. Prerequisite: MATH 507.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 508

MATH 509 Theory of Optimal Control (3)
Trajectories from ordinary differential equations with control variables. Controllability, optimality, maximum principle. Relaxation and existence of solutions. Techniques of nonsmooth analysis. Prerequisite: real analysis on the level of MATH 426; background in optimization corresponding to MATH 515. Offered: jointly with AMATH 509.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 509

MATH 510 Seminar in Algebra (2-5, max. 12)
Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 510

MATH 514 Networks and Combinatorial Optimization (3)
Mathematical foundations of combinatorial and network optimization with an emphasis on structure and algorithms with proofs. Topics include combinatorial and geometric methods for optimization of network flows, matching, traveling salesmen problem, cuts, and stable sets on graphs. Special emphasis on connections to linear and integer programming, duality theory, total unimodularity, and matroids. Prerequisite: either MATH 308 or AMATH 352 any additional 400-level mathematics course. Offered: jointly with AMATH 514.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 514

MATH 515 Fundamentals of Optimization (5)
Maximization and minimization of functions of finitely many variables subject to constraints. Basic problem types and examples of applications; linear, convex, smooth, and nonsmooth programming. Optimality conditions. Saddlepoints and dual problems. Penalties, decomposition. Overview of computational approaches. Prerequisite: linear algebra and advanced calculus. Offered: jointly with AMATH 515/IND E 515.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 515

MATH 516 Numerical Optimization (3)
Methods of solving optimization problems in finitely many variables, with or without constraints. Steepest descent, quasi-Newton methods. Quadratic programming and complementarity. Exact penalty methods, multiplier methods. Sequential quadratic programming. Cutting planes and nonsmooth optimization. Prerequisite: MATH 515. Offered: jointly with AMATH 516.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 516

MATH 521 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with STAT 521; A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 521

MATH 522 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with STAT 522; W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 522

MATH 523 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with STAT 523; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 523

MATH 524 Real Analysis (5)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering the theory of measure and integration, point set topology, Banach spaces, Lp spaces, applications to the theory of functions of one and several real variables. Additional topics to be chosen by instructor. Prerequisite: MATH 426 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 524

MATH 525 Real Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 524. Prerequisite: MATH 524.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 525

MATH 526 Real Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 525. Prerequisite: MATH 525.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 526

MATH 527 Functional Analysis (3)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence. Review of Banach, Hilbert, and Lp spaces; locally convex spaces (duality and separation theory, distributions, and function spaces); operators on locally convex spaces (adjoints, closed graph/open mapping and Banach-Steinhaus theorems); Banach algebras (spectral theory, elementary applications); spectral theorem for Hilbert space operators. Additional topics chosen by instructor. A working knowledge of real variables, general topology, and complex variables is assumed.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 527

MATH 528 Functional Analysis (3)
Continuation of MATH 527. Prerequisite: MATH 527.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 528

MATH 529 Functional Analysis (3)
Continuation of MATH 528. Prerequisite: MATH 528.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 529

MATH 530 Seminar in Analysis (2-5, max. 12)
Prerequisite: permission of graduate program coordinator. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 530

MATH 534 Complex Analysis (5)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering complex numbers, analytic functions, contour integration, power series, analytic continuation, sequences of analytic functions, conformal mapping of simply connected regions, and related topics. Prerequisite: MATH 426.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 534

MATH 535 Complex Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 534. Prerequisite: MATH 534.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 535

MATH 536 Complex Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 535. Prerequisite: MATH 535.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 536

MATH 544 Topology and Geometry of Manifolds (5)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering general topology, the fundamental group, covering spaces, topological and differentiable manifolds, vector fields, flows, the Frobenius theorem, Lie groups, homogeneous spaces, tensor fields, differential forms, Stokes's theorem, deRham cohomology. Prerequisite: MATH 404 and MATH 426 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 544

MATH 545 Topology and Geometry of Manifolds (5)
Continuation of MATH 544. Prerequisite: MATH 544.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 545

MATH 546 Topology and Geometry of Manifolds (5)
Continuation of MATH 545. Prerequisite: MATH 545.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 546

MATH 547 Geometric Structures (3, max. 9)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering differential-geometric structures on manifolds, Riemannian metrics, geodesics, covariant differentiation, curvature, Jacobi fields, Gauss-Bonnet theorem. Additional topics to be chosen by the instructor, such as connections in vector bundles and principal bundles, symplectic geometry, Riemannian comparison theorems, symmetric spaces, symplectic geometry, complex manifolds, Hodge theory. Prerequisite: MATH 546.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 547

MATH 548 Geometric Structures (3, max. 9)
Continuation of MATH 547. Prerequisite: MATH 547.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 548

MATH 549 Geometric Structures (3, max. 9)
Continuation of MATH 548. Prerequisite: MATH 548.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 549

MATH 550 Seminar in Geometry (2-5, max. 12)
Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 550

MATH 554 Linear Analysis (5)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering advanced linear algebra and matrix analysis, ordinary differential equations (existence and uniqueness theory, linear systems, numerical approximations), Fourier analysis, introductions to functional analysis and partial differential equations, distribution theory. Prerequisite: MATH 426 and familiarity with complex analysis at the level of MATH 427 (the latter may be obtained concurrently).
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 554

MATH 555 Linear Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 554. Prerequisite: MATH 554.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 555

MATH 556 Linear Analysis (5)
Continuation of MATH 555. Prerequisite: MATH 555.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 556

MATH 557 Introduction to Partial Differential Equations (3)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence. Reviews the theory of distribution theory, weak derivatives, and Fourier transform; Laplace, heat, wave, Schrodinger equations; and notion of Euler-Lagrange equation and variational derivative. Prerequisite: either MATH 526 or MATH 556.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 557

MATH 558 Introduction to Partial Differential Equations (3)
Continuation of MATH 557. Covers Sobolev spaces; boundary value problems; additional topics may include: Cauchy-Kowalevski theorem, first order equations, initial value problems, and variational methods. Prerequisite: MATH 557.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 558

MATH 559 Introduction to Partial Differential Equations (3)
Continuation of MATH 558. Covers selected topics such as: introduction to microlocal analysis, Lax parametrix construction, Schauder estimates, Calderson-Zygmund theory, energy methods, and boundary regularity on rough domains. Prerequisite: MATH 558.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 559

MATH 564 Algebraic Topology (3)
First quarter of a three-quarter sequence covering classical and modern approaches; complexes and their homology theory; applications; fixed points, products and Poincare duality; axiomatic approach. Prerequisite: MATH 506 and MATH 544, or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 564

MATH 565 Algebraic Topology (3)
Continuation of MATH 564. Prerequisite: MATH 564.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 565

MATH 566 Algebraic Topology (3)
Continuation of MATH 565. Prerequisite: MATH 565.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 566

MATH 570 Seminar in Topology (2-5, max. 12)
Prerequisite: permission of graduate program coordinator. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 570

MATH 574 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3)
Sets, real numbers, topology of metric spaces, normed linear spaces, multivariable calculus from an advanced viewpoint. Introduction to Lebesque measure and integration. Intended for students in biostatistics and related fields; does not fulfill requirements for degrees in mathematics.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 574

MATH 575 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3)
Sets, real numbers, topology of metric spaces, normed linear spaces, multivariable calculus from an advanced viewpoint. Introduction to Lebesque measure and integration. Intended for students in biostatistics and related fields; does not fulfill requirements for degrees in mathematics.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 575

MATH 576 Fundamental Concepts of Analysis (3)
Sets, real numbers, topology of metric spaces, normed linear spaces, multivariable calculus from an advanced viewpoint. Introduction to Lebesque measure and integration. Intended for students in biostatistics and related fields; does not fulfill requirements for degrees in mathematics.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 576

MATH 577 Lie Groups and Lie Algebras (3, max. 9)
Topics chosen from: root systems and reflection groups; the structure, classification, and representation theory of complex semisimple Lie algebras, compact Lie groups, or semisimple Lie groups; algebraic groups; enveloping algebras; infinite-dimensional representation theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras; harmonic analysis on Lie groups. Prerequisite: MATH 506; MATH 526 or MATH 546.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 577

MATH 578 Lie Groups and Lie Algebras (3, max. 9)
Topics chosen from: root systems and reflection groups; the structure, classification, and representation theory of complex semisimple Lie algebras, compact Lie groups, or semisimple Lie groups; algebraic groups; enveloping algebras; infinite-dimensional representation theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras; harmonic analysis on Lie groups. Prerequisite: MATH 506; MATH 526 or MATH 546.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 578

MATH 579 Lie Groups and Lie Algebras (3, max. 9)
Topics chosen from: root systems and reflection groups; the structure, classification, and representation theory of complex semisimple Lie algebras, compact Lie groups, or semisimple Lie groups; algebraic groups; enveloping algebras; infinite-dimensional representation theory of Lie groups and Lie algebras; harmonic analysis on Lie groups. Prerequisite: MATH 506; MATH 526 or MATH 546.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 579

MATH 580 Current Topics in Mathematics (2, max. 12)
Discussion of current research topics in mathematics, with emphasis on current departmental research projects and interests. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 580

MATH 581 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 36)
Advanced topics in various areas of mathematics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 581

MATH 582 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 36)
Advanced topics in various areas of mathematics. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 582

MATH 583 Special Topics in Mathematics (1-5, max. 36)
Advanced topics in various areas of mathematics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 583

MATH 584 Applied Linear Algebra and Introductory Numerical Analysis (5)
Numerical methods for solving linear systems of equations, linear least squares problems, matrix eigen value problems, nonlinear systems of equations, interpolation, quadrature, and initial value ordinary differential equations. Prerequisite: either a course in linear algebra or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with AMATH 584; A.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 584

MATH 585 Numerical Analysis of Boundary Value Problems (5)
Numerical methods for steady-state differential equations. Two-point boundary value problems and elliptic equations. Iterative methods for sparse symmetric and non-symmetric linear systems: conjugate-gradients, preconditioners. Prerequisite: either AMATH 581, AMATH 584/MATH 584, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with AMATH 585; W.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 585

MATH 586 Numerical Analysis of Time Dependent Problems (5)
Numerical methods for time-dependent differential equations, including explicit and implicit methods for hyperbolic and parabolic equations. Stability, accuracy, and convergence theory. Spectral and pseudospectral methods. Prerequisite: either AMATH 581, AMATH 584/MATH 584, AMATH 585/MATH 585, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with AMATH 586/ATM S 581; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 586

MATH 590 Seminar in Probability (2-5, max. 12)
Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 590

MATH 597 Seminar on Teaching Math (1, max. 3)
Issues in the teaching and learning of college mathematics, such as discovering and working with student background and expectations, increasing student engagement with course material, and evaluating student achievement. For graduate students who are, or soon will be, teaching mathematics courses on their own. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 597

MATH 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 600

MATH 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 700

MATH 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: MATH 800

NBIO 301 Introduction to Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology (5) NW Moody
Introduces students to the physiological and molecular properties of individual nerve cells and the synaptic connections between them, and to principles of nervous system development. Includes weekly laboratory sessions. Prerequisite: BIOL 220. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 301

NBIO 302 Introduction to Systems and Behavioral Neurobiology (3/5) NW M. BOSMA, J. SISNEROS
Introduces neuroethology, i.e., the mechanisms by which neurons and the synaptic connections among them produce sensory perceptions and complex behavioral outputs. Available with or without weekly laboratory sessions. Prerequisite: NBIO 301. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 302

NBIO 303 Neuronal Coding and Computation (1-3)
Introduces computational neuroscience, focusing on concepts that are related to neuronal and synaptic biophysics. Works through mathematical concepts and methods to describe neuronal dynamics, and introduce methods to analyze and characterize neural coding. Uses Matlab as a programming language to implement models or neuronal dynamics to perform data analysis. Prerequisite: MATH 125. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 303

NBIO 401 Systems Neurobiology (3) NW Robinson
Introduces students to the anatomical and physiological organization of the major sensory, motor, and associative systems of the mammalian brain. Behavioral data used to stress functional integration of systems. Includes gross brain anatomy demonstration and computer tutorials. Prerequisite: NBIO 302. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 401

NBIO 402 Diseases of the Nervous System (3) NW Froener, Horwitz
Introduces the basic mechanisms of mammalian nervous system function through the study of human neurological diseases that result from specific disruption of neuronal signaling. Prerequisite: NBIO 401. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 402

NBIO 403 Systems and Behavioral Neurobiology (3) NW Kim
Topics include information processing in sensory and motor systems, sensory-motor integration, learning, and memory. Using examples from the field of neuroethology, encourages students to work independently on problems taken from the recent neurobiological research literature. Prerequisite: NBIO 401. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 403

NBIO 404 Neuropharmacology (3) NW Stella
Actions of drugs on the brain at clinical, cellular, and molecular levels. Therapeutic use of drugs in treatment of neurological and psychiatric diseases. Abuse of drugs and the mechanisms of addiction, tolerance, and withdrawal. Prerequisite: NBIO 401. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 404

NBIO 440 Topics in Current Neurobiology Research (2, max. 6) NW
Prerequisite: NBIO 302. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 440

NBIO 450 Current Research Literature in Neurobiology (2, max. 6) NW
Weekly journal club in neurobiology. Students read and discuss original research articles in neurobiology, centered around a specific topic each quarter. Prerequisite: BIOL 220. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 450

NBIO 496 Peer Teaching Facilitator in Neurobiology (5, max. 10) M. KENNEDY
For undergraduates assisting in Neurobiology courses as facilitators. Peer Facilitators assist with laboratories, attend lectures, and attend weekly course meetings, gaining direct course experience. Does not include independent teaching or grading. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 496

NBIO 499 Individual Research in Neurobiology (3-6, max. 18)
Students carry out projects in laboratories of program faculty. Prerequisite: NBIO 302.
View course details in MyPlan: NBIO 499

PHYS 101 Physical Science By Inquiry I (5-) NW, QSR
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 101

PHYS 104 Facilitated Group Inquiry I (2) NW
Laboratory-based development of concepts and reasoning skills. Develops problem-solving techniques and scientific method in a large group setting. Co-requisite: PHYS 114. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 104

PHYS 105 Facilitated Group Inquiry II (2) NW
Laboratory-based development of concepts and reasoning skills. Develops problem-solving techniques and scientific method in a large group setting. Co-requisite: PHYS 115. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 105

PHYS 106 Facilitated Group Inquiry III (2) NW
Laboratory-based development of concepts and reasoning skills. Develops problem-solving techniques and scientific method in a large group setting. Co-requisite: PHYS 116. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 106

PHYS 107 Physics Concepts for Non-Scientists (5) NW Wilkes
Overview of physical science, from subatomic particles to cosmology. Intended to help students understand the importance of scientific research in society with emphasis on basic ideas about how the universe operates. Readings from popular books by leading scientists for non-science majors. For students without high school physics or with limited mathematics background. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 107

PHYS 110 Liberal Arts Physics (5) NW, QSR
Basic concepts of physics presented with emphasis on their origin and their impact on society and the Western intellectual tradition. Primarily for students in the arts, humanities, and social sciences. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 110

PHYS 114 General Physics (4) NW, QSR
Basic principles of physics presented without use of calculus. Suitable for students majoring in technically oriented fields other than engineering or the physical sciences. Mechanics. Credit is not given for both PHYS 114 and PHYS 121. Recommended: working knowledge of algebra and trigonometry; one year high school physics; concurrent registration in PHYS 117. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 114

PHYS 115 General Physics (4) NW
Basic principles of physics presented without use of calculus. Suitable for students majoring in technically oriented fields other than engineering or the physical sciences. Heat and electromagnetism. Credit is not given for both PHYS 115 and PHYS 122. Prerequisite: PHYS 114 or PHYS 121; recommended: concurrent registration in PHYS 118. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 115

PHYS 116 General Physics (4) NW
Basic principles of physics presented without use of calculus. Suitable for students majoring in technically oriented fields other than engineering or the physical sciences. Sound, light, and modern physics. Credit is not given for both PHYS 116 and PHYS 123. Prerequisite: PHYS 115 or PHYS 122; recommended: concurrent registration in PHYS 119. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 116

PHYS 117 General Physics Laboratory (1) NW
Mechanics laboratory. Credit is not given for both PHYS 117 and the PHYS 121 laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 114 which may be taken concurrently. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 117

PHYS 118 General Physics Laboratory (1) NW
Heat and electromagnetism laboratory. Credit is not given for both PHYS 118 and the PHYS 122 laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 115 which may be taken concurrently. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 118

PHYS 119 General Physics Laboratory (1) NW
Sound, light, and modern physics laboratory. Credit is not given for both PHYS 119 and the PHYS 123 laboratory. Prerequisite: PHYS 116 which may be taken concurrently. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 119

PHYS 121 Mechanics (5) NW, QSR
Basic principles of mechanics and experiments in mechanics for physical science and engineering majors. Lecture tutorial and lab components must all be taken to receive credit. Credit is not given for both PHYS 114 and PHYS 121. Prerequisite: either MATH 124 or MATH 134, which may be taken concurrently; recommended: one year high school physics. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 121

PHYS 122 Electromagnetism (5) NW
Covers the basic principles of electromagnetism and experiments in these topics for physical science and engineering majors. Lecture tutorial and lab components must all be taken to receive credit. Credit is not given for both PHYS 115 and PHYS 122. Prerequisite: either MATH 125 or MATH 134, which may be taken concurrently; PHYS 121. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 122

PHYS 123 Waves (5) NW
Explores electromagnetic waves, the mechanics of oscillatory motion, optics, waves in matter, and experiments in these topics for physical science and engineering majors. Lecture tutorial and lab components must all be taken to receive credit. Credit is not given for both PHYS 116 and PHYS 123. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 134, which may be taken concurrently; PHYS 122. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 123

PHYS 207 The Physics of Music (3) NW
The nature of sound; vibrations; traveling and standing waves; response of the ear to sound; production of musical sounds.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 207

PHYS 210 Physics by Inquiry I (5) NW
Selected topics in physics with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Develops perspective of science as a process of inquiry. Prerequisite: either PHYS 116 or PHYS 123. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 210

PHYS 211 Physics by Inquiry I (5) NW
Selected topics in physics with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Develops perspective of science as a process of inquiry. Prerequisite: PHYS 210. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 211

PHYS 212 Physics by Inquiry I (5) NW
Selected topics in physics with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Develops perspective of science as a process of inquiry. Prerequisite: PHYS 211. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 212

PHYS 214 Light and Color (5) NW, QSR
Compares past explanation of certain familiar natural phenomena with present understandings. Lamps and lighting, outdoor light, optical devices, color vision, perspective, paints, and pigments. Quantitative comparison critical to the course, but college-level mathematics background not required. Intended for non-science students.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 214

PHYS 216 Science and Society (5) I&S/NW Chaloupka
Investigation of the relationship between science, technology, and society. Nuclear physics and molecular biology serve as concrete examples of fields with significant impact on society. Offered: jointly with JSIS B 216; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 216

PHYS 217 Energy Future: The Technical and Social Barriers to Large-Scale Sustainable Energy (5) I&S/NW Seidler
Surveys the scientific, technological, and social barriers to large-scale renewable energy implementation. Includes discussion of solar, wind, nuclear, and other sustainable modalities; energy efficiency; large-scale energy storage; the greenhouse effect; and numerous domestic and international case studies of sustainable energy efforts. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 217

PHYS 224 Thermal Physics (3) NW
Introduces heat, thermodynamics, elementary kinetic theory, and statistical physics. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136, which may be taken concurrently; PHYS 122, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: ASpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 224

PHYS 225 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (3) NW
Emphasizes two-state systems. Introduces spin and applications in nuclear magnetic resonance. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 121, PHYS 122, and PHYS 123; PHYS 227. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 225

PHYS 226 Particles and Symmetries (3) NW
Introduction to the fundamental constituents of matter and the symmetries which characterize their interactions. Topics include special relativity; strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions; quarks and leptons; baryons and mesons; and neutrinos and nuclei. Prerequisite: PHYS 225; recommended: PHYS 228. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 226

PHYS 227 Elementary Mathematical Physics (4) NW
Applications of mathematics in physics with emphasis on the mechanics of particles and continuous systems. Develops and applies computational methods, both analytic and numerical. Prerequisite: either MATH 134, MATH 135, and MATH 136, or one of MATH 307, MATH 308, MATH 309, MATH 324, AMATH 401, AMATH 351, AMATH 352, any of which may be taken concurrently; minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 121, PHYS 122, and PHYS 123. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 227

PHYS 228 Elementary Mathematical Physics (4) NW
Applications of mathematics in physics with emphasis on the mechanics of particles and continuous systems. Develops and applies computational methods, both analytic and numerical. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 227. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 228

PHYS 231 Introductory Experimental Physics (3) NW
Introduction to data acquisition and analysis using experiments which measure fundamental constants or properties of nature (Planck's constant, Boltzmann's constant, speed of light, charge of electron). Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 123. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 231

PHYS 232 Introduction to Computational Physics (3) NW
Computational techniques applied to physics and data analysis in laboratory setting. Emphasis on numerical solutions of differential equations, least square data fitting, Monte Carlo methods, and Fourier Analysis. A high-level language taught and used; no previous computing experience required. Prerequisite: PHYS 227.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 232

PHYS 248 Introductory Selected Topics (1-5, max. 15) NW
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 248

PHYS 294 Introduction to Research: Frontiers of Physics (1) NW
Provides a survey of contemporary research in experimental and theoretical physics, with an emphasis on subfields seeing revolutionary changes in understanding. Recommended: PHYS 123. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 294

PHYS 321 Electromagnetism (4) NW
First of a three-quarter sequence. Charges at rest and in motion; dielectric and magnetic media; electromagnetic waves; relativity and electromagnetism; physical optics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in PHYS 227; two of PHYS 228, MATH 307 or AMATH 351, MATH 308 or AMATH 352, MATH 309 or AMATH 353, MATH 324, MATH 326, or AMATH 401; recommended: either PHYS 228 or MATH 324. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 321

PHYS 322 Electromagnetism (4) NW
Continuation of PHYS 321. Charges at rest and in motion; dielectric and magnetic media; electromagnetic waves; relativity and electromagnetism; physical optics. Prerequisite: PHYS 321. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 322

PHYS 323 Electromagnetism (4) NW
Continuation of PHYS 322. Charges at rest and in motion; dielectric and magnetic media; electromagnetic waves; relativity and electromagnetism; physical optics. Prerequisite: PHYS 322. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 323

PHYS 324 Quantum Mechanics (4) NW
First part of a two-quarter sequence. Introduction to nonrelativistic quantum mechanics: need for quantum theory, Schrodinger equation, operators, angular momentum, the hydrogen atom, identical particles, and the periodic table. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in both PHYS 225 and PHYS 228; either MATH 307 or AMATH 351, MATH 308 or AMATH 353, MATH 309 or AMATH 353, MATH 324, MATH 326, or AMATH 401. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 324

PHYS 325 Quantum Mechanics (4) NW
Continuation of PHYS 324. Introduction to nonrelativistic quantum mechanics: perturbation theory, the variational principle, radiation; application of quantum mechanics to atomic physics, magnetic resonance, scattering, and various special topics. Prerequisite: PHYS 324. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 325

PHYS 328 Statistical Physics (3) NW
Elements of statistical mechanics and their applications. Prerequisite: PHYS 224; PHYS 324, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 328

PHYS 329 Mathematical Methods and Classical Mechanics (3) NW
Mathematical methods applied to classical mechanics, including Lagrangian mechanics. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in PHYS 228. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 329

PHYS 331 Optics Laboratory (3) NW
Measurements of interference and diffraction, optical properties of matter, image processing, interferometry, holography. Prerequisite: PHYS 228. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 331

PHYS 334 Electric Circuits Laboratory (3) NW
Basic elements of DC, AC, and transient circuits; electronic devices; electrical measurements. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136; minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 123; recommended: PHYS 227. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 334

PHYS 335 Electric Circuits Laboratory (3) NW
Electrical measurements, data management, digital electronics of microprocessor systems. Building a microprocessor application. Prerequisite: PHYS 334. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 335

PHYS 401 Special Problems (*, max. 30)
Supervised individual study. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 401

PHYS 402 Special Problems (*, max. 30)
Supervised individual study. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 402

PHYS 403 Special Problems (*, max. 30)
Supervised individual study. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 403

PHYS 405 Physical Science by Inquiry II (5-) NW
Emphasis on depth of understanding and development of reasoning and representational skills essential to the scientific process. Provides background for teaching physical science as a process of inquiry and develops scientific literacy. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 405

PHYS 406 Physical Science by Inquiry II (-5) NW
Emphasis on depth of understanding and development of reasoning and representational skills essential to the scientific process. Provides background for teaching physical science as a process of inquiry and develops scientific literacy. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 406

PHYS 407 Physics by Inquiry II (5) NW
Selected topics in physics, with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Background for teaching physics at secondary school and introductory college levels. Some mathematical proficiency required. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in PHYS 123. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 407

PHYS 408 Physics by Inquiry II (5) NW
Selected topics in physics, with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Background for teaching physics at secondary school and introductory college levels. Some mathematical proficiency required. Prerequisite: PHYS 407. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 408

PHYS 409 Physics by Inquiry II (5) NW
Selected topics in physics, with emphasis on depth of understanding and development of skills essential to the scientific process. Background for teaching physics at secondary school and introductory college levels. Some mathematical proficiency required. Prerequisite: PHYS 408. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 409

PHYS 410 Physics by Inquiry for In-Service Teachers (1-2, max. 30) NW
A "hands-on" inquiry-oriented approach designed to train in-service teachers in the use of the physical science content for any of several science programs selected by a school or school district. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 410

PHYS 411 Physics by Inquiry for Lead Teachers (1-4, max. 4) NW
Extends the content covered in previous courses and helps prepare lead teachers to train colleagues to use any of several science programs selected by schools or districts. Prerequisite: two courses selected from PHYS 405, PHYS 406, PHYS 407, PHYS 408, or PHYS 409. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 411

PHYS 412 Physics by Inquiry for Lead Teachers (1-4, max. 4) NW
Extends the content covered in previous courses and helps prepare lead teachers to train colleagues to use any of several science programs selected by schools or districts. Prerequisite: two courses selected from PHYS 405, PHYS 406, PHYS 407, PHYS 408, or PHYS 409. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 412

PHYS 413 Physics by Inquiry for Lead Teachers (1-4, max. 4) NW
Extends the content covered in previous courses and helps prepare lead teachers to train colleagues to use any of several science programs selected by schools or districts. Prerequisite: two courses selected from PHYS 405, PHYS 406, PHYS 407, PHYS 408, or PHYS 409. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 413

PHYS 421 Contemporary Atomic Physics (3) NW
Survey of the principal phenomena of atomic and molecular physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 322; PHYS 325; recommended: PHYS 323. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 421

PHYS 422 Contemporary Nuclear and Particle Physics (3) NW
Survey of the principal phenomena of nuclear and elementary-particle physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 226; PHYS 322; PHYS 325. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 422

PHYS 423 Contemporary Condensed Matter Physics (3) NW
Survey of the principal phenomena of solid-state physics. Prerequisite: a minimum 2.0 grade in PHYS 324; recommended: PHYS 328. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 423

PHYS 427 Applications of Physics (1-3, max. 12) NW
Current applications of physics to problems in the sciences and technology.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 427

PHYS 428 Selected Topics in Physics (1-5, max. 12) NW
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 428

PHYS 429 Biophysics (3)
Application of the concepts and methods of physics to biological systems. Prerequisite: PHYS 224; PHYS 225; recommended: PHYS 328. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 429

PHYS 431 Modern Physics Laboratory (3) NW
Measurement in modern atomic, molecular, and solid-state physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 225; PHYS 334; recommended: 30 credits in physics. Offered: WS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 431

PHYS 432 Modern Physics Laboratory (3) NW
Measurement in modern atomic, molecular, and solid-state physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 225; PHYS 334; recommended: 30 credits in physics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 432

PHYS 433 Modern Physics Laboratory (3) NW
Techniques in nuclear and elementary-particle research. Prerequisite: PHYS 225; PHYS 334; recommended: 30 credits in physics; PHYS 226. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 433

PHYS 434 Application of Computers to Physical Measurement (3) NW
Laboratory giving specific instruction and experience in interfacing laboratory equipment to computers. Prerequisite: PHYS 334; recommended: PHYS 335; 30 credits in physics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 434

PHYS 436 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos (4) NW
Variational Principle, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Mechanics, phase space, nonlinear dynamics, approach to chaos, Lyapunov exponents, applications to physical systems. Numerical exercises to illustrate phenomena. Prerequisite: MATH 309.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 436

PHYS 441 Quantum Physics (4) NW
Introduction to concepts and methods of quantum physics: wave mechanics (de Broglie wavelength, uncertainty principle, Schrodinger equation), one-dimensional examples (tunneling, harmonic oscillator), formalism of quantum physics, angular momentum and the hydrogen atom. Recommended: 30 credits in physical science or engineering. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 441

PHYS 451 Issues for Ethnic Minorities and Women In Science and Engineering (3/5) I&S
Addresses issues faced by women and ethnic minorities in physical sciences and engineering. Focuses on participation, barriers to participation, and solutions to those issues for women and ethnic minorities in physical sciences and engineering. Offered: jointly with GWSS 485.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 451

PHYS 460 Water in the Environment (3) NW
Discusses the unique physical and chemical properties of the water molecule in relation to the atmospheric greenhouse effect, precipitation formation, oceanic circulations, infiltration of water through soils, geyser eruptions, and glacier and sea ice thickness. Prerequisite: either ESS 310, MATH 126, or MATH 136; PHYS 123. Offered: jointly with ATM S 460/ESS 424.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 460

PHYS 485 Senior Honors Seminar (1, max. 3) NW
Prerequisite: Honors standing; 12 credits of physics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 485

PHYS 486 Senior Honors Seminar (1, max. 3) NW
Prerequisite: Honors standing; 12 credits of physics. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 486

PHYS 487 Senior Honors Seminar (1, max. 3) NW
Prerequisite: Honors standing; 12 credits of physics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 487

PHYS 494 Seminar on Current Problems in Physics (1, max. 3) NW
Supervised, independent study of topics (chosen by faculty in charge) of current interest in physics. Written and oral presentations summarizing work accomplished are required. Recommended: 12 credits in physics above 200 level. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 494

PHYS 495 Seminar on Current Problems in Physics (1, max. 3) NW
Supervised, independent study of topics (chosen by faculty in charge) of current interest in physics. Written and oral presentations summarizing work accomplished are required. Recommended: 12 credits in physics above 200 level. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 495

PHYS 496 Seminar on Current Problems in Physics (1, max. 3) NW
Supervised, independent study of topics (chosen by faculty in charge) of current interest in physics. Written and oral presentations summarizing work accomplished are required. Recommended: 12 credits in physics above 200 level. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 496

PHYS 499 Undergraduate Research (1-6, max. 18)
Research in physics and study of physics literature. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 499

PHYS 501 Tutorials in Teaching Physics (1, max. 2)
Preparation for teaching introductory physics; use and critical analysis of instructional materials in a collaborative learning environment; supervised teaching practicum in which instructional materials are used with undergraduates. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 501

PHYS 502 Tutorials in Teaching Physics (1, max. 2)
Preparation for teaching introductory physics; use and critical analysis of instructional materials in a collaborative learning environment; supervised teaching practicum in which instructional materials are used with undergraduates. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 502

PHYS 503 Tutorials in Teaching Physics (1, max. 2)
Preparation for teaching introductory physics; use and critical analysis of instructional materials in a collaborative learning environment; supervised teaching practicum in which instructional materials are used with undergraduates. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 503

PHYS 505 Mechanics (3)
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics, with applications to various topics such as coupled oscillators, parametric resonance, anharmonic oscillations, chaos. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 505

PHYS 506 Numerical Methods (3)
Integration, solution of differential equations, Monte Carlo methods, function minimization, data analysis, modern computing techniques, computation in experimental physics. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 506

PHYS 507 Physical Applications of Group Theory (3)
Applications of finite and continuous groups, representation theory, symmetry, and conservation laws to physical systems. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 507

PHYS 511 Topics in Contemporary Physics (3, max. 9)
Topics of current experimental, theoretical, or technological interest in modern physics. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 511

PHYS 513 Electromagnetism and Relativity (3)
First of a three-part sequence. Principles of electrostatics, complex variable techniques, boundary value problems and their associated mathematical techniques, Green's functions. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 513

PHYS 514 Electromagnetism and Relativity (4)
Continuation of PHYS 513. Electric and magnetic fields in free space and material media, wave guides and cavity resonators. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 514

PHYS 515 Electromagnetism and Relativity (4)
Continuation of PHYS 514. Special relativity, electromagnetic radiation from accelerated charges, synchrotron radiation, Cerenkov radiation, radiation reaction. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 515

PHYS 517 Quantum Mechanics (4)
First of a three-part sequence. Modern non-relativistic quantum mechanics developed, beginning with its basic principles. Dirac and abstract operator notation introduced, starting with simple examples. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 517

PHYS 518 Quantum Mechanics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 517. Modern non-relativistic quantum mechanics. The character of the theory illustrated both with physical examples and with conceptual problems. Topics include: atomic structure, scattering processes, density operator description of mixed states, and measurement theory. Abstract operator methods emphasized in the exposition of angular momentum, scattering, and perturbation theory. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 518

PHYS 519 Quantum Mechanics (4)
Continuation of PHYS 518. Modern non-relativistic quantum mechanics. Physical examples and conceptual problems. Topics include: atomic structure, scattering processes, density operator description of mixed states, and measurement theory. Abstract operator methods emphasized in the exposition of angular momentum, scattering, and perturbation theory. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 519

PHYS 520 Advanced Quantum Mechanics - Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (4)
Multi-particle systems, second quantization, diagrammatic perturbation theory, radiation, correlation functions and multi-particle scattering, relativistic theories, renormalizability, basic quantum electrodynamics, and other applications. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 520

PHYS 521 Advanced Quantum Mechanics - Introduction to Quantum Field Theory (3)
Multi-particle systems, second quantization, diagrammatic perturbation theory, radiation, correlation functions and multi-particle scattering, relativistic theories, renormalizability, basic quantum electrodynamics, and other applications. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 521

PHYS 522 Advanced Quantum Mechanics: Introduction to Modern Quantum Field Theory (3)
Functional integrals, symmetry breaking, critical phenomena and continuum limits, and non-perturbative methods. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 522

PHYS 524 Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (4)
Statistical mechanical basis of the fundamental thermodynamical laws and concepts; classical and quantum statistical distribution functions; applications to selected thermodynamic processes and examples of Bose and Fermi statistics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 524

PHYS 525 Statistical Mechanics (3)
Introduction to equilibrium and non-equilibrium aspects of many-body systems; scale invariance and universality at phase transitions and critical phenomena; exactly soluble models; Markov processes, master equations and Langevin equation in non-equilibrium stochastic processes. Prerequisite: PHYS 524. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 525

PHYS 527 Current Problems in Physics (1)
Introduction to current research topics for beginning graduate students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 527

PHYS 528 Current Problems in Physics (1)
Introduction to current research topics for beginning graduate students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 528

PHYS 530 Laser Physics (4)
Physics underlying laser design and operation in the context of common laboratory systems. Topics may include continuous and pulsed lasers; solid, liquid, and gas gain media; Q-switching, mode-locking, resonator theory, nonlinear optics, and others. Prerequisite: basic quantum mechanics, electromagnetism, and optics; recommended: PHYS 541.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 530

PHYS 532 Liquid Crystal Devices (4)
Physics of liquid crystals and applications to practical display devices. Phases, phase transitions, optical and dielectric properties, molecular and device "engineering," future prospects.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 532

PHYS 536 Introduction to Acoustics and Digital Signal Processing (4) Chaloupka
Introduces mathematical and physics principles of acoustics in digital signal processing applications. Complex analysis and Fourier methods, physics of vibrations and waves, solutions of the wave equation, digital convolution and correlation methods, and Maximum Length Sequence method in signal analysis and spread-spectrum applications. Prerequisite: PHYS 123; MATH 120.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 536

PHYS 541 Applications of Quantum Physics (4)
Techniques of quantum mechanics applied to lasers, quantum electronics, solids, and surfaces. Emphasis on approximation methods and interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter. Prerequisite: PHYS 421 or PHYS 441 or equivalent. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 541

PHYS 542 Numerical Methods in Physics (4)
Numerical methods for analysis and computation in physics. Topics may include integration, differential equations, partial differential equations, optimization, data handling, and Monte Carlo techniques. Emphasis is applications in physics. Prerequisite: 30 credits in physical sciences, computer science, or engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 542

PHYS 543 Electromagnetic Theory (4)
Principal concepts of electromagnetism. Static electric and magnetic fields. Boundary-value problems. Electric and magnetic properties of materials. Electromagnetic waves and radiation. Prerequisite: 30 credits in physical sciences, computer science, or engineering. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 543

PHYS 544 Applications of Electromagnetic Theory (4)
Emphasis may vary from year to year. Topics may include electromagnetic waves, radiation, scattering, wave guides, plasma physics, quantum electronics, and accelerator physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 543 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 544

PHYS 545 Contemporary Optics (4)
Coordinated lecture and laboratory treatment of topics in contemporary optics. Subjects include Fourier optics, lens systems, interferometry, laser optics, holography, polarization, crystal optics, birefringence, laser and conventional light sources, optical detectors. Prerequisite: PHYS 543 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 545

PHYS 546 Condensed-Matter Physics (4)
Introduction to the theory of solids: crystal structure in real space and reciprocal space, phonons, free electrons, band theory, semiconductor devices. Prerequisite: PHYS 441 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 546

PHYS 547 Electronics for Physics Research (4)
Electronic techniques as applied in physics research. Topics include noise, control-system analysis, operational amplifiers, lock-in amplifiers, precision power supplies and metering, data transmission, microprocessors. Several integrated measurement systems are examined in the context of specific research problems. Prerequisite: elementary electronics.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 547

PHYS 549 Low-Temperature Physics and Cryogenics (4)
Condensed-matter physics at low and ultralow temperatures. Production of low temperatures; liquefaction of gases, dilution refrigeration, magnetic and compressional cooling. Macroscopic quantum effects: superconductivity, superfluidity. Applications of superconductors. The ultralow temperature frontier.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 549

PHYS 550 Atomic Physics (3)
Theory of atomic structure and spectra; atomic and molecular beams; resonance techniques; atomic collisions; topics of current interest. Prerequisite: PHYS 519.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 550

PHYS 551 Atomic Physics (3)
Theory of atomic structure and spectra; atomic and molecular beams; resonance techniques; atomic collisions; topics of current interest. Prerequisite: PHYS 519.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 551

PHYS 552 Introduction to Cosmic Ray Physics (3)
The nature and cosmological significance of cosmic ray photons and particles. The motion and confinement of particles in the geophysical, interplanetary, and interstellar medium. Theories of the processes involved in the high-energy interaction of cosmic rays, including shower theory. Methods of measurement and current problems. Prerequisite: introductory quantum mechanics. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 552

PHYS 554 Nuclear Astrophysics (3)
Big bang nucleosynthesis; nuclear reactions in stars; solar neutrinos and neutrino oscillations; core-collapse supernovae; nucleosynthesis in stars, novae, and supernovae; neutron starts; composition and sources of cosmic rays; gamma ray bursts; atmospheric neutrinos. Offered: jointly with ASTR 510; A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 554

PHYS 555 Cosmology and Particle Astrophysics (3)
Big bang cosmology; relativistic world models and classical tests; background radiation; cosmological implications of nucleosynthesis; baryogenesis; inflation; galaxy and large-scale structure formation; quasars; intergalactic medium; dark matter.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 555

PHYS 557 High Energy Physics (3)
First quarter of a three-quarter series. Emphasis on the experimental foundations of particle physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 519; recommended: PHYS 520, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 557

PHYS 558 High Energy Physics (3)
Second quarter of a three-quarter series. Phenomenology of the standard model of strong and electro-weak interactions, including an introduction to Feynman diagrams. Prerequisite: PHYS 519; recommended: PHYS 520; PHYS 521, both of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 558

PHYS 559 High Energy Physics (3)
Third quarter of a three-quarter series. Topics of current interest in high-energy particle physics. Prerequisite: PHYS 519; recommended: PHYS 520; PHYS 521, both of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 559

PHYS 560 Theoretical Nuclear Physics (3)
First of a two-part sequence. Nuclear structure, scattering, reactions, and decays in terms of elementary properties of nucleons and current theoretical models. Prerequisite: PHYS 519. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 560

PHYS 561 Theoretical Nuclear Physics (3)
Continuation of PHYS 560. Nuclear structure, scattering, reactions, and decays in terms of elementary properties of nucleons and current theoretical models. Prerequisite: PHYS 519. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 561

PHYS 564 General Relativity (3)
First of a two-part sequence. General covariance and tensor analysis, the relativistic theory of gravitation as given by Einstein's field equations, experimental tests and their significance, and applications of general relativity, particularly in the areas of astrophysics and cosmology. Prerequisite: PHYS 515.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 564

PHYS 565 General Relativity (3)
Continuation of PHYS 564. General covariance and tensor analysis, the relativistic theory of gravitation as given by Einstein's field equations, experimental tests and their significance, and applications of general relativity, particularly in the areas of astrophysics and cosmology. Prerequisite: PHYS 515.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 565

PHYS 567 Theory of Solids (3)
First quarter of a course on modern solid state and condensed matter physics, aimed at bringing student's knowledge up to the level of current literature. Topics include structural, electronic, and vibrational properties; optical response functions and dynamics; transport theory; and cooperative phenomena. Prerequisite: PHYS 519, PHYS 524. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 567

PHYS 568 Theory of Solids (3)
Second quarter of a course on modern solid state and condensed matter physics, aimed at bringing the student's knowledge up to the level of current literature. Additional topics (see PHYS 567) include magnetism, quantum Hall effect, superconductivity. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 568

PHYS 570 Quantum Field Theory (3)
Emphasizes either relativistic quantum field theory or the many-body problem. Normally offered credit/no-credit only. Prerequisite: PHYS 522.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 570

PHYS 571 Quantum Field Theory (3)
Emphasizes either relativistic quantum field theory or the many-body problem. Normally offered credit/no-credit only. Prerequisite: PHYS 522.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 571

PHYS 572 Modern Quantum Field Theory (3)
Advanced topics in quantum field theory. Prerequisite: PHYS 570, PHYS 571. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 572

PHYS 575 Selected Topics in Applications of Physics (*, max. 30)
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 575

PHYS 576 Selected Topics in Experimental Physics (*, max. 30)
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 576

PHYS 578 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (*, max. 30)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 578

PHYS 580 Physics Colloquium (*, max. 30)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 580

PHYS 581 Seminar in High-Energy Physics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 581

PHYS 582 Seminar in Particle Theory (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 582

PHYS 583 Seminar in Relativistic Astrophysics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 583

PHYS 584 Seminar in Recent Developments in Atomic Physics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 584

PHYS 585 Seminar in Experimental Nuclear Physics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 585

PHYS 586 Seminar in Condensed Matter Physics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 586

PHYS 587 Seminar in Nuclear Theory (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 587

PHYS 588 Particle Astrophysics Seminar (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 588

PHYS 589 Seminar in Problems of Physics Education (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 589

PHYS 590 Seminar in Statistical Physics (1-3, max. 20)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 590

PHYS 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Study or research under the supervision of individual faculty members. Prerequisite: permission of supervisor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 600

PHYS 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of Supervisory Committee chairperson. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PHYS 800

PSYCH 101 Introduction to Psychology (5) I&S King, McDermott, Osterhout, Passer
Surveys major areas of psychological science. Core topics include human social behavior, personality, psychological disorders and treatment, learning, memory, human development, biological influences, and research methods. Related topics may include sensation, perception, states of consciousness, thinking, intelligence, language, motivation, emotion, stress and health, cross-cultural psychology, and applied psychology. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 101

PSYCH 200 Comparative Animal Behavior (3-5) NW Barash, Beecher
Research methods and findings of comparative animal behavior, their importance to an understanding of human behavior; rationale for study of behavioral differences/similarities between animal species, behavior viewed as part of adaptation of each species to its natural habitat. Not open for credit to students who have taken PSYCH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 200

PSYCH 201 Psychology of Performance Enhancement (4) I&S Smith, Smoll
Applications of psychological theories, research, and intervention strategies to performance enhancement in variety of life settings. Self-regulation models and techniques; stress and emotional control; attention control and concentration; mental rehearsal; time management; goal-setting; memory enhancement; communication and interpersonal conflict resolution. Participation in various psychological training procedures. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 201

PSYCH 202 Biopsychology (5) NW Kim, Olavarria
Examines the biological basis of behavior, the nervous system, how it works to control behavior and sense the world, and what happens when it malfunctions. Topics include learning and memory, development, sex, drugs, sleep, the senses, emotions, and mental disorders. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 202

PSYCH 203 Introduction to Personality and Individual Differences (4) I&S Smith
Overview of the major theories, research findings, and applications in the scientific study of personality. Covers research methods and approaches to measuring personality variables. Not open for credit to students who have taken PSYCH 303. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 203

PSYCH 205 Behavior Disorders (5) I&S
Examines the bio-psycho-social origins of behavioral disorders. Topics include theories of etiology, developmental perspectives of behavior disorders, and assessment and diagnosis of the most common behavioral disorders. Note: not open for credit for students who have taken PSYCH 305. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 205

PSYCH 206 Human Development (5) I&S
Theoretical perspectives and research methods in child development with an overview of historical and current works. Includes prenatal and biological development, the development of cognitive, linguistic, and social and emotional abilities. Not open for credit to students who have taken PSYCH 306. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 206

PSYCH 209 Fundamentals of Psychological Research (5) Little, Passer
Psychological research methodology and techniques. Topics include the logic of hypothesis testing, experimental design, research strategies and techniques, fundamentals of scientific writing, search and evaluation of research literature in psychology, and ethical issues in psychological research. Required for all psychology majors. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 101. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 209

PSYCH 210 The Diversity of Human Sexuality (5) I&S, DIV McDermott
Considers biological, psychological, and socio-cultural determinants of human sexuality and sexual behavior, and how their interaction leads to diverse expressions of sexuality, sexual bonding, gender orientation, reproductive strategies, and physical and psychological sexual development. Topics include cultural appraisal of sexuality, sexual health and reproduction (pregnancy, contraception, abortion), and sexual abuse and assault.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 210

PSYCH 245 Introduction to Social Psychology (5) I&S Brown
Overview of major findings of social psychology, emphasizing the relevance for understanding the social behaviors of individuals and groups of individuals and their relationship to social context. Not open for credit to students who have taken PSYCH 345. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 245

PSYCH 250 Racism and Minority Groups (5) I&S, DIV
Overview of the causes, contexts, and consequences of racism and its effects upon minority groups and society. Emphasis on cultural history, political and socioeconomic structures that contribute to racism. Examination of current issues in race relations and cultural pluralism in the United States and selected international topics.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 250

PSYCH 257 Psychology of Gender (5) I&S, DIV Kenney
Major psychological theories of gender-role development; biological and environmental influences that determine and maintain gender differences in behavior; roles in children and adults; topics include aggression, cognitive abilities, achievement motivation, affiliation. Recommended: either PSYCH 101 or GWSS 200. Offered: jointly with GWSS 257.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 257

PSYCH 260 Psychosocial Aspects of Nuclear War (3) I&S Barash
Introduction to basic issues of nuclear war, including its effects, weaponry, and history of the arms race. Primary focus on the psychologic underpinnings of deterrence, relations between nations, and the personal and social forces operative in the arms race and peace movements.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 260

PSYCH 291 Principles of Applied Animal Behavior (3-5) NW
Further explores the basic principles of animal behavior, and related disciplines, with particular emphasis on application to human-animal interaction and issues. Introduces the primary literature in applied animal behavior.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 291

PSYCH 292 Applied Animal Behavior in Practice (3-5) NW
Integrates animal behavior theory with real-world practice to resolve practical problem in human-animal interactions, including companion animals, captive animals, and livestock. Introduces the primary clinical literature in applied animal behavior.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 292

PSYCH 299 Psychology Transfer Academic Community (2)
Provides opportunity for transfer students new to or contemplating the psychology major to experience an in- depth orientation to the department, curriculum, and resources available to undergraduates. Students meet weekly to explore ways to effectively engage in the major and expand their understanding of the academic discipline. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 299

PSYCH 300 Animal Behavior (5) NW Beecher, Sisneros
Introduces important concepts and empirical findings in animal behavior. Emphasizes evolutionary and mechanistic approaches to understanding diversity and complexity of behavior. Topics include communication, mating, migration, and sociality. Prerequisite: either BIOL 118, BIOL 161, or BIOL 180.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 300

PSYCH 303 Personality (5) I&S Brown
Overview of major perspectives, scientific issues, applications, and research findings in the area of personality. Direct exposure to scientific literature, writing assignments, and research-based class experiences prepare students for advanced work in personality, social, abnormal, and developmental psychology. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in each of PSYCH 101; PSYCH 202; and PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 303

PSYCH 305 Abnormal Psychology (5) I&S
An overview of major categories of psychopathology, including description and classification, theoretical models, and recent research on etiology and treatment. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 305

PSYCH 306 Developmental Psychology (5) I&S Repacholi, Sommerville
Overview of past and present theoretical and research-based approaches to biological, cognitive, and social development from the prenatal period to early adolescence. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 306

PSYCH 315 Understanding Statistics in Psychology (5) QSR Boynton, Flaherty, Little
Statistics for psychological research. Elementary probability theory, hypothesis testing, and estimation. Satisfies the statistics requirement for majors registered in the psychology Bachelor of Arts degree program. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; 2.0 in either MATH 111, MATH 112, MATH 120, MATH 124, or MATH 144. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 315

PSYCH 317 Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Psychology (5) QSR Little, Loftus
Probability theory as a model for scientific inference. Probabilistic variables and experimental outcomes, conditional probability, binomial and related distributions, experiments as samples, statistics and sampling distributions, the normal distribution, confidence intervals, problems of estimation from experiments. Prerequisite: minimum 2.5 grade in PSYCH 209; 2.0 in either MATH 124, MATH 134, or MATH 144. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 317

PSYCH 318 Statistical Inference in Psychological Research (5) QSR Little, Loftus
Hypothesis testing: probabilistic and statistical basis. Development and application of statistical inference techniques employed in psychological research: confidence intervals, t-test, ANOVA, and correlation and regression. Nature and control of experimental and inferential error in research. Required for majors for psychology BS degree. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 317. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 318

PSYCH 322 Introduction to Drugs and Behavior (3) NW Diaz
Basic concepts of drug action emphasizing the behavioral consequences of the intake of a variety of drugs. Prerequisite: PSYCH 202.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 322

PSYCH 330 Laboratory in Animal Behavior (5) NW Brenowitz
Experience with a variety of animal species and experimental procedures and instrumentation. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 315, or 2.0 in PSYCH 317; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 330

PSYCH 331 Laboratory in Human Performance (5) I&S Joslyn
Selected aspects of human cognition, perception, and performance. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; either 2.0 in PSYCH 315, or 2.0 in PSYCH 317.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 331

PSYCH 332 Neurobehavioral Lab (5) NW Diaz
Explores the neural mechanisms of behavior via neuropharmacological and neuroanatomical approaches. Includes the ethics and regulation of animal experimentation. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 315, or 2.0 in PSYCH 317.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 332

PSYCH 333 Sensory and Perceptual Processes (5) NW Boynton, Buck, Covey, Fine
An overview of each of the major senses with emphasis on the structure and function of sensory systems and the relation of the underlying biology to perceptual processes and behavior. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 333

PSYCH 334 Laboratory in Social Psychology (5) I&S Cheryan
Methodology of laboratory and field research on social behavior; data analysis and report writing; research projects. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317; minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 245 or PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 334

PSYCH 345 Social Psychology (5) I&S Brown, Kaiser
The scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, and actions influence, and are influenced by, other people. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 345

PSYCH 350 Honors Research Seminar in Psychology (2-, max. 4) Bassok
Presentations by professors and advanced students concerning the rationale, methodology, and progress of their research projects; assistance with research projects; preparation of junior paper. Four credits of PSYCH 350 required for all junior Honors candidates in conjunction with PSYCH 498 and PSYCH 499. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 350

PSYCH 355 Cognitive Psychology (5) I&S Joslyn, Miyamoto
Current theory and research in perception, attention, memory and learning, attitudes, thinking and decision making, and language. For the student who wishes a survey or who intends additional work in any of the above content areas. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 355

PSYCH 357 Psychobiology of Women (5) NW Kenney
Physiological and psychological aspects of women's lives; determinants of biological sex; physiological and psychological events of puberty; menopause; sexuality; contraception, pregnancy, childbirth, and lactation; role of culture in determining psychological response to physiological events. Offered: jointly with GWSS 357.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 357

PSYCH 380 Cross-Cultural Competence (4) I&S
Facilitates development of multicultural competence; focuses on mental health/social service needs of ethnic and linguistic minorities, and developing personal/interpersonal skills to reduce barriers, enhance effective service provision to cross cultural groups, sexual minorities, and disabled people. Prerequisite: PSYCH 250; either PSYCH 305 or PSYCH 306.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 380

PSYCH 399 Foreign Study (3-5, max. 10)
Upper division psychology courses for which there are no direct University of Washington equivalents taken through the UW Study Abroad program.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 399

PSYCH 400 Learning (5) I&S/NW
Experimental research and basic theories primarily in animal learning. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 400

PSYCH 402 Infant Behavior and Development (3/5) I&S Meltzoff
Psychological development in the first two years of life. Basic and advanced techniques for assessing psychological development in infancy. Classic theories of human infancy and examination of a wide range of new experiments about infant behavior and development. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 206, PSYCH 306 or PSYCH 414.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 402

PSYCH 403 Motivation (5) I&S/NW
Theory and research on reinforcement, punishment, frustration, preference, instinctual mechanisms, and other factors controlling animal behavior. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 403

PSYCH 405 Advanced Personality: Theory and Research (5) I&S
Intensive survey of theoretical concepts and detailed review of experimental methods and experiments in the field of personality. Prerequisite: PSYCH 303.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 405

PSYCH 407 History of Psychology (5) I&S
Historical and theoretical background of the basic assumptions of modern psychology, including such doctrines as behaviorism, determinism, and associationism and the scientists who developed them. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 407

PSYCH 408 Mechanisms of Animal Behavior (4) NW Beecher, Brenowitz, Sisneros
Comparative exploration of physiological and perceptual mechanisms that control behaviors necessary for survival and reproduction in animals. Model systems discussed include animal communication, mate choice, escape behavior, learning and memory, orientation, biological rhythms, foraging behavior. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in BIOL 180, or 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300. Offered: jointly with BIOL 408.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 408

PSYCH 409 Sociobiology (5) NW
Biological bases of social behavior, emphasizing evolution as a paradigm. Emphasizes how to think like an evolutionary biologist, especially with regard to interest conflict. Topics are individual versus group selection, kin selection, altruism, mating systems, sexual conflict, alternate reproductive strategies, and parent/offspring conflict. Prerequisite: either minimum grade of 2.0 in BIOL 180, 2.0 in B BIO 180, 2.0 in TESC 120, 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300. Offered: jointly with BIOL 409.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 409

PSYCH 410 Child and Adolescent Behavior Disorders (5) I&S
Introduction to psychopathology in children and adolescents, and an overview of principal modes of intervention. Particularly for students interested in advanced work in clinical psychology, social work, or special education. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 305; either 2.0 in PSYCH 306 or 2.0 in PSYCH 202, 2.0 in PSYCH 206, and 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 410

PSYCH 411 Perceptual Development (5) I&S/NW Meltzoff
Origins and development of perception in human infancy. Object, face, and speech perception; cross-modal relations between touch, vision, audition. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 206, PSYCH 306, or PSYCH 414. Offered: jointly with SPHSC 411.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 411

PSYCH 413 Adolescent Development (5) I&S
Provides an overview of physical, cognitive, psychosocial, and emotional development of adolescents with an emphasis on understanding the context in which young people grow up. Explores cultural, environmental, and social influences on development. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; 2.0 in either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 413

PSYCH 414 Cognitive Development (5) I&S Sommerville
Key theoretical and research approaches to cognitive development from infancy through adolescence. Sensorimotor development, language development, imitation, number concepts, logical reasoning, memory, cognition in adolescents, intelligence, and the role of biology, environment, and experience. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 306, or 2.0 in both PSYCH 206 and PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 414

PSYCH 415 Personality Development of the Child (5) I&S Repacholi
Socialization theory and research, infant attachment and social relationships, development of aggressive and altruistic behaviors, sex-role development, moral development, parent and adult influences. Applied issues in social development and policy. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 206 or PSYCH 306.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 415

PSYCH 416 Animal Communication (5) NW Beecher, Brenowitz, Sisneros
Evolution and mechanisms of animal communication and related processes of perception, thinking, and social behavior. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in BIOL 180, 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 416

PSYCH 417 Human Behavior as a Natural Science (5) I&S/NW
Evolution of human social behavior and the adaptive significance of communication systems from a sociobiological and anthropological perspective. Prerequisite: either PSYCH 200, PSYCH 300, BIO A 201, or BIOL 180.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 417

PSYCH 418 Primate Social Behavior (5) NW
Social behavior, ecology, and group structure of monkeys and apes from an evolutionary, sociobiological, and anthropological perspective. Prerequisite: either minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200, 2.0 in PSYCH 300, 2.0 in BIO A 201, or 2.0 in BIOL 180.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 418

PSYCH 419 Behavioral Studies of Zoo Animals (5, max. 10) NW
Observational studies of behavior of zoo animals to expand basic knowledge of animal behavior, conservation of endangered species, and research methodology with discussions and tours focusing on zoo philosophy and operations. Offered in cooperation with Woodland Park Zoo. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in BIOL 180, 3.5 in PSYCH 200, or 2.0 in PSYCH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 419

PSYCH 420 Drugs and Behavior (3) NW Diaz
Animal and clinical research on the behavioral consequences of drug intake. Prerequisite: PSYCH 322.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 420

PSYCH 421 Neural Basis of Behavior (5) NW Diaz
Anatomical and physiological principles and resultant behavior involved in the integrative action of the nervous system. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 421

PSYCH 423 Sensory Basis of Behavior (5) NW Olavarria
Study of sensory mechanisms as a way to understand behavior. Basic properties of neurons, anatomy, and physiology of sensory systems, with some emphasis on the visual system. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 202 or PSYCH 333.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 423

PSYCH 425 Surgical and Histological Techniques (5) NW
Practicum in basic and advanced surgical and histological techniques used in psychophysiological experimentation. Prerequisite: PSYCH 421.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 425

PSYCH 426 Neurobiology of Learning and Memory (4) NW Mizumori
Theory and research on how animals learn and remember, including basic concepts of brain plasticity, how brain areas and neurons adapt to changes in experiences throughout the lifespan, and cellular and structural substrates of a "memory." Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 202, PSYCH 322, PSYCH 333, PSYCH 421, PSYCH 422, or PSYCH 423.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 426

PSYCH 427 Behavioral Endocrinology (5) NW
The endocrine system and how its secretions influence and are influenced by behavior; relationships between the nervous and endocrine systems. Prerequisite: PSYCH 421.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 427

PSYCH 428 Human Motor Control and Learning (5) I&S/NW
Current theory and research in human motor performance and skill acquisition. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; 2.0 in PSYCH 202.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 428

PSYCH 429 Brain Anatomy for the Behavioral Scientist (1) NW Diaz
Detailed review of the neuroanatomical features of the sheep brain with laboratory demonstrations. Prerequisite: PSYCH 421 which may be taken concurrently.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 429

PSYCH 430 Development of Brain Connections (4) NW Olavarria
Analysis of innate and environmental factors that play a role in the development of brain connections. Critical review of current literature on the various strategies used by neurons to find their appropriate targets. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 202, PSYCH 333, PSYCH 421, PSYCH 422, or PSYCH 423.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 430

PSYCH 432 Visual Neuroscience (4) I&S/NW
Surveys current facts/theories about how our brains interpret the images formed by our eyes to create a presentation of the visual environment. Topics include retinal processing, 3-D vision; color, form, motion, and object perception; and visual illusions. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 333 or PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 432

PSYCH 433 Regulatory Behavior (4) NW Kenney
Neural and endocrine mechanisms in the control of food and water intake and the regulation of body weight and fluid balance. Prerequisite: either PSYCH 421 or PSYCH 427.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 433

PSYCH 435 Human Color Vision (5) I&S/NW Buck
Discusses how color does not exist in the physical environment but is instead a creation of our brains. Explores perceptual, physiological, developmental, evolutionary, genetic, and cultural aspects of human color vision, including its role in language, culture, and art. Prerequisite: PSYCH 202; PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 435

PSYCH 436 Developmental Aspects of Sport Competition (4) I&S Smoll
Biophysical and psychosocial influences of sport participation on growth and development of children and youth. Competition readiness, injuries, stress, aggression, roles and responsibilities of parents and coaches. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 436

PSYCH 437 Motor Development (4) NW Smoll
Analysis of motor development from prenatal origins through adolescence with emphasis on relations between biophysical and psychosocial development of children and youth. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 437

PSYCH 438 Social Psychology of Sport (4) I&S Smith, Smoll
Reciprocal effects of interpersonal and group influence processes, e.g., social facilitation, behavior modification, observational learning, individual versus group performance, group cohesion, leadership, aggression. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 101; 2.0 in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 438

PSYCH 441 Perceptual Processes (5) I&S/NW
Theory and findings in perception with a focus on visual perception in humans. Discrimination and constancy for simple judgments, segregation and identification of visual objects, and specific areas of investigation such as reading and computer vision. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 333.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 441

PSYCH 443 Motivational Theories in Social Psychology (5) I&S
Theories of motivation in social psychology. Emphasis on how motivation and cognition mutually influence each other to produce behavior. Explores such topics as persuasion, goal pursuit, self-regulation, achievement, and social comparison. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 443

PSYCH 445 Theories of Social Psychology (5) I&S Brown
Evaluation of the major theories of human social behavior supported by the empirical literature; theories of social cognition and thought; major theories of social interaction, group processes, and social learning. Prerequisite: PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 445

PSYCH 446 Personality Assessment (3) I&S Smith
Measurement of personality variables in personality research, social psychology, and clinical psychology. Theoretical conceptions underlying various clinical and experimental scales and an assessment of their construct validity and behavioral correlates. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 303; 2.0 in PSYCH 315; 2.0 in PSYCH 317.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 446

PSYCH 447 Psychology of Language (4) VLPA/I&S Osterhout
Introduction to the study of language, including language structure, speech perception, language acquisition, psychological processes underlying comprehension and production of language, the relation between brain and language, and the question of the species-specificity of human language. Prerequisite: either minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209, minimum 2.0 grade in LING 200, or LING 201. Offered: jointly with LING 447.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 447

PSYCH 448 Seminar in Psychology (1-15, max. 15)
Selected research topics of contemporary interest. Quarterly listings of specific offerings are available at departmental advising office.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 448

PSYCH 449 ORGANIZATIONAL AND INDUSTRIAL PSYCHOLOGY (3) I&S
Examines research on human behavior in industrial and organizational environments. Topics include research methods, job analysis, the prediction of workplace performance, personnel selection and training, performance appraisal, group influences, job satisfaction, job motivation, leadership, and human factors. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 449

PSYCH 450 Honors Research Seminar in Psychology (2-, max. 4) Bassok
Senior thesis research; preparation of senior thesis; oral presentation of research. Four credits of PSYCH 450 required for all senior Honors candidates in conjunction with PSYCH 498 and PSYCH 499. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 450

PSYCH 451 Health Psychology (5) I&S/NW
Overview of the psychological and behavioral factors in health and disease. Includes research on both psychological causes and treatments. Topics include stress, risky behaviors, patient-provider interactions, pain, behavioral/medical treatments, and lifestyle interventions. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209; 2.0 in either PSYCH 303, or PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 451

PSYCH 452 Psychology of the Self-Concept (4) I&S Brown
Examines psychological theory and research on the role of the self-concept in regulating behavior. Topics include the development of the self-concept; self-awareness; and self-esteem maintenance. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 245 or PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 452

PSYCH 454 Personality and Social Influence (4) I&S Shoda
Survey of various theories and research for analyzing person-situation interactions - how the qualities of persons and situations combine to generate thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of a person in a given social situation. Prerequisite: PSYCH 209; either PSYCH 203, PSYCH 245, PSYCH 303, or PSYCH 345.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 454

PSYCH 456 Social and Moral Development (5) I&S Kahn
Theoretical approaches toward explaining children's social and moral development, including those that are nativistic, sociobiological, behavioristic, psychoanalytic, and constructivist. Use of theory to investigate applied problems related to parenting, education, peer relationships, authority, sexuality, culture, ecology, and technology. Prerequisite: either PSYCH 206 or PSYCH 306.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 456

PSYCH 457 Language Development (5) VLPA/I&S
First-language acquisition and use by children. Emphasis on theoretical issues and research techniques. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 206, PSYCH 306, LING 200, or LING 400. Offered: jointly with LING 457.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 457

PSYCH 458 Behavioral Genetics (4) NW
Role of genetics in determining variation in human and animal behavior and in regulating behavioral development. Techniques for quantifying genetic variation, behavioral effects, and gene expression. Prerequisite: either minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200, 2.0 in PSYCH 300, or 2.0 in BIOL 180. Offered: jointly with BIOL 458.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 458

PSYCH 459 Evolutionary Psychology (4) I&S/NW Barash, Beecher
Explores human behavior from the perspective of biological evolution. Covers core issues such as cooperation, communication, aggression, mating, reproduction, and parental and family interactions, as well as specialized applications within psychology such as psychopathology. Encourages a critical, skeptical examination of this new field. Prerequisite: either minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200 or minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 459

PSYCH 460 Cognitive Neuroscience (4) NW Murray, Osterhout
Discussion of neural systems underlying cognitive behavior with particular focus on breakdown of cognition following brain damage. Topics include object and space perception, language, voluntary movement, attention, and memory. Examination of contributions from related areas of neuroimaging, visual perception, linguistics, physiology, and neuroscience. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 333, PSYCH 355, or PSYCH 421.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 460

PSYCH 461 Asian American Psychology (5) I&S Cheryan
Psychological research on Asian American individuals and the community, with emphasis on social psychological research. Topics include the model minority myth, stereotypes of unassimilation, gender and sexuality, and relationships with other groups. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 303, PSYCH 305, PSYCH 306, PSYCH 345, or PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 461

PSYCH 462 Human Memory (5) I&S Joslyn
Research and theory in key areas of memory. Issues covered include information processing theory, the link between memory processes and their biological underpinnings, autobiographical memory, implicit memory, and the effect of emotion on memory. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; recommended: PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 462

PSYCH 463 Implicit and Unconscious Cognition (3) I&S/NW Greenwald
Overview of method, theory, and findings concerning cognitive processes operating outside attentional focus or without introspective awareness. Considers relevance to basic phenomena of social, cognitive, and clinical psychology. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317; minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 303, PSYCH 305, PSYCH 333, PSYCH 345, or PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 463

PSYCH 465 Intelligence (5) I&S
Analysis of individual differences in cognition. Includes description/use of psychometric ("intelligence test") models, test scores' relationship to academic and non-academic performance, information processing and biological models of intelligence (including genetic models). Discussion of male-female and demographic group differences in cognition. Prerequisite: either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317; PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 465

PSYCH 466 Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making (5) I&S Miyamoto
Human information processing in judgment and decision making, especially the interface between cognitive theories and normative and prescriptive theories of decision making. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317; either PSYCH 331, PSYCH 355, or PSYCH 361.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 466

PSYCH 469 Psychology of Reasoning (4) I&S Bassok
Cognitive processes in human learning, problem solving, deductive and inductive reasoning. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 469

PSYCH 470 Psychology and Music (5) VLPA/I&S Covey
Introduction to the scientific study of musical behavior. An overview of current topics in the psychology of music from the areas of musical perception and cognition, musical development, music therapy, musical performance, and composition. Includes psychoacoustical and neuropsychological foundations, research methods, and some basic material in music theory. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 202 or NBIO 302.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 470

PSYCH 471 Cognition In the Real World (4-5, max. 10) I&S Joslyn
Examines cognitive issues in applied settings, such as the workplace and education. Topics include such issues as attention, expertise, problem solving, decision-making, human error, automation, navigation, and individual differences. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 471

PSYCH 472 Human Factors Psychology (4) I&S
Considers human performance factors in the design of tools/equipment, tasks/jobs, and work and living environments. Emphasizes the importance of human perception, memory, attention, motor control, and social context for understanding ways to optimize the relationship between people and technology. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 472

PSYCH 477 Psychology of Peace (5) I&S Barash
Examination of the psychological aspects of peace in the modern world. Topics include theories of individual aggressiveness and violence, leadership personalities, crisis decision making, nuclear psychology, images of the enemy, and psychological opportunities and obstacles to the establishment of a peaceful society.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 477

PSYCH 478 Cultural Psychology (4) I&S
Surveys cultural influences on cognitive, emotion, morality, self-concept, and mental health, from a multicultural perspective. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 478

PSYCH 479 Advanced Human Sexuality (5) I&S McDermott
Intensive reading on current issues relevant to the physiological, psychological, cultural aspects of human sexuality. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 210.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 479

PSYCH 480 Ideas of Human Nature (5) I&S Barash
Reviews various approaches to the nature of human nature, including ideas from ancient philosophy, theories of the soul, empiricism, idealism, conditioning, social constructions, concepts of Freud, Marx, the existentialists, and neo-Darwinism. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 480

PSYCH 481 Seminar in Advanced Quantitative Methods (3) Little
Examines the role of statistical methods in psychological research. Issues and controversies surrounding null hypothesis significance testing. Review of selected alternative statistical methods in psychology. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 318.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 481

PSYCH 482 Advanced Research Methods for Behavioral Psychology (4) QSR Greenwald, Shoda
Develops skills of collecting and analyzing behavioral research data, communicating the results orally and in writing, and expressing perspectives on issues of scientific method and practice. Prerequisite: either PSYCH 315 or PSYCH 317; either PSYCH 330, PSYCH 331, PSYCH 332, or PSYCH 350. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 482

PSYCH 483 Writing in Psychology (5) Covey, Joslyn
Helps students refine scientific writing skills. Students practice conducting focused literature searches and writing literature reviews, preparing empirical data for presentations, organizing and writing research reports, and writing about psychology for a lay audience. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 209; minimum 2.0 grade in either PSYCH 300, PSYCH 303, PSYCH 305, PSYCH 306, PSYCH 333, PSYCH 345, or PSYCH 355.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 483

PSYCH 485 Primate Conservation Biology and Behavior (5) NW Kyes
Examines the principles and concepts of conservation biology as they apply to the nonhuman primates with special attention to theoretical advances, conservation strategies, and management practices central to primate conservation. Prerequisite: either minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200 or 2.0 in PSYCH 300 or 2.0 in BIO A 201.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 485

PSYCH 486 Animal Mind (4) NW Beecher
Explores the cognitive capacities of animals. Focuses on the classical question, first clearly posed by Darwin, of how similar are the cognitive processes underlying behavior in humans and animals. Encourages a critical, skeptical examination of this new field. Prerequisite: minimum 3.5 grade in PSYCH 200 or 2.0 in PSYCH 300.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 486

PSYCH 487 Advanced Psychobiology of Women (5) I&S/NW Kenney
Intensive reading on current issues relevant to women's psychology and physiology. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 357/ GWSS 357. Offered: jointly with GWSS 487; W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 487

PSYCH 488 Stress and Coping (4) I&S/NW
Reviews theories and research concerning stress and its roles in behavior, personality, development, health, and interpersonal relationships. Coping analyzed as a factor in the way people respond to stressful circumstances. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 202; 2.0 in PSYCH 209.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 488

PSYCH 489 Clinical Psychology (3) I&S
Basic issues, methods, and research: professional issues, psychological assessment, and approaches to psychotherapy and behavioral change. Prerequisite: minimum 2.0 grade in PSYCH 305.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 489

PSYCH 490 Stress Management (3) I&S/NW
Nature of stress. Physiological responses to stress and relaxation. Techniques of stress management with training in relaxation, biofeedback, meditation, cognitive restructuring, exercise, nutrition, interpersonal communication skills, and time management. Prerequisite: PSYCH 101.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 490

PSYCH 491 Special Topics in Child Development, Learning, and Mental Health (1-5, max. 30) I&S
Selected topics of contemporary interest in child development, learning, and mental health.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 491

PSYCH 494 Field Study in Animal Behavior (2-3, max. 9) Kyes
Field experience in areas relating to animal behavior through participation in seminar discussion and field exercises and training at foreign and domestic field study sites.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 494

PSYCH 496 Undergraduate Teaching Experience in Psychology (2-3, max. 6)
Students are trained as assistants in quiz sections or as supplemental tutors for undergraduate psychology courses. Designed especially for students planning graduate work or education certification. An overall maximum of 18 credits in PSYCH 496, PSYCH 497, PSYCH 498, and PSYCH 499 may apply toward a baccalaureate degree. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 496

PSYCH 497 Undergraduate Fieldwork (2-5, max. 10)
Individual consultation with faculty member and supervised practicum experience in a broad range of community settings and agencies dealing with psychological problems. An overall maximum of 18 credits in PSYCH 496, PSYCH 497, PSYCH 498, and PSYCH 499 may apply toward a baccalaureate degree.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 497

PSYCH 498 Directed Reading in Psychology (1-3, max. 18)
Readings in special interest areas under supervision of departmental faculty. Discussion of reading in conference with the instructor. An overall maximum of 18 credits in PSYCH 496, PSYCH 497, PSYCH 498, and PSYCH 499 may apply toward a baccalaureate degree.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 498

PSYCH 499 Undergraduate Research (1-3, max. 18)
Design and completion of individual research projects. An overall maximum of 18 credits in PSYCH 496, PSYCH 497, PSYCH 498, and PSYCH 499 may apply toward a baccalaureate degree.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 499

PSYCH 500 Proseminar in Psychology (1, max. 10) Greenwald
Presentations on professionally and practically useful topics by guest faculty presenters designed for first-year and second-year graduate students. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 500

PSYCH 502 Core Concepts in Animal Behavior (3) Barash, Beecher, Sisneros
Reading, reports, and discussion on animal behavior, with a focus on topics that lie at the interface of animal behavior, evolutionary science, neurobiology, and psychology. Includes social organization, mating systems, foraging, learning, communication, and agonistic behavior. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 502

PSYCH 503 Core Concepts in Behavior Genetics (4) Shoda
Overview of current approaches to genetic analysis in psychology. Role of genetics in behavioral variation, and in regulating behavioral development. Techniques for quantifying genetic variation, behavioral effects of genes, and patterns of gene expression. Genetic effects on major behavioral differences. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 503

PSYCH 504 Core Concepts in Behavioral Neuroscience (3) Buck, Covey, Diaz, Kim, Mizumori, Olavarria
Historical and contemporary perspectives in behavioral neuroscience. Current methodologies and research strategies. May include sensory processing, genetics, behavioral neuroendocrinology, developmental neural plasticity, neurobiology of learning and memory, lifespan perspectives on behavioral neurobiology, and psychopharmacology. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 504

PSYCH 505 Core Concepts in Neuroethology (3) Sisneros
Reviews the current topics and approaches to the study of the neurobiological basis of natural behaviors or "neurothology." Explores core concepts in the field of neuroethology and examines the role of the nervous system and the underlying neural circuits adapted for species-typical behaviors. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 505

PSYCH 506 Core Concepts in Cognitive Neuroscience (3) Murray, Osterhout
Combines psychological models of information processing with research techniques in the biomedical sciences. Topics in vision, attention, memory, motor behavior, and language illustrate this integrative approach. Research methods include behavioral, single unit, lesion, and neuro-imaging techniques. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 506

PSYCH 507 Core Concepts in Cognitive Psychology (3) Bassok, Miyamoto
Survey of the major topics in human cognition. Discussion of memory, concepts and categories, language, decision-making, and problem solving. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 507

PSYCH 508 Core Concepts in Perception (3) Loftus
Current topics in perception, psychophysics, sensory memory, pattern recognition, letter and word perception, and visual masking. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 508

PSYCH 510 Core Concepts in Social Psychology (4) Cheryan, Kaiser, Shoda
An overview of contemporary theories and research in social psychology, focusing on introducing graduate students to the field as practitioners of social psychological research. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 510

PSYCH 511 Core Concepts in Personality (3) Shoda, Smith
Review of personality research. Roles of cognitive, affective, motivational, and psychodynamic processes. Critical evaluation of current personality, its antecedents, and its influences over behavior. Attention to role of personality variables in social relationships. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 511

PSYCH 513 Core Concepts in Biological Basis of Development (4)
Embryological, genetic, physiological, and evolutionary perspectives of human development; biological development in infancy; sensory development and its influence on the development of perception; primate models for human development. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 513

PSYCH 514 Core Concepts in Early Cognitive and Linguistic Development (4) Meltzoff, Sommerville
Origins and early development of thought and language. Piagetian theory and modern-day revisions. In-depth examination of historical and philosophical bases for current empirical research. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 514

PSYCH 515 Core Concepts in Personality and Social Development (4)
Theories and empirical literature in personality and social development throughout infancy, childhood. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 515

PSYCH 517 Core Concepts in Systems of Psychotherapy (3) George
Theory and research of major systems of psychotherapy, including the psychodynamic, behavioral, cognitive, and family systems approaches as an introduction to subsequent practica in clinical psychology. Required for all graduate students majoring in clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 517

PSYCH 518 Core Concepts in Behavior Disorders (5) Zoellner
Major types of behavior disorders, with emphasis on clinical manifestations, relevant research, and theoretical perspectives. Required for all graduate students majoring in clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 518

PSYCH 519 Core Concepts in Behavior Change (5) Kohlenberg
Behavioral theory and behavioral approaches to treatment. Prerequisite: PSYCH 518 and permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 519

PSYCH 522 Laboratory in Statistical Computation I (2)
Techniques of computation using statistical software on personal computers. Organization of data files, transformations of variables, graphical representations of data, descriptive statistics, elementary inferential statistical analyses. Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment in PSYCH 524, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 522

PSYCH 523 Laboratory in Statistical Computation II (2)
Techniques of statistical computation using statistical software on personal computers and mainframe computers. Multiple regression, analysis of variance and covariance. Planned and post hoc comparisons and confidence intervals. Data analytic diagnostics for violations of regression assumptions. Prerequisite: PSYCH 522 and PSYCH 524, concurrent enrollment in PSYCH 525, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 523

PSYCH 524 Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis (4)
Basic concepts of statistical theory and methods of data analysis. Emphasis on the integration of statistical theory, statistical computation, and psychological research methods. Required of all first-year graduate students in psychology. Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment in PSYCH 522, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 524

PSYCH 525 Linear Models and Data Analysis (4)
Analysis of data in the behavioral sciences. Required of all first-year graduate majors. Prerequisite: PSYCH 522, PSYCH 524; concurrent registration in PSYCH 523, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 525

PSYCH 526 Multivariate Statistics (4)
An introduction to statistical modeling; interactive data analyses; use of regression, ANOVA, logistic regression, and log-linear models in explanatory studies. Prerequisite: PSYCH 525.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 526

PSYCH 527 Mathematical Modeling for Psychology and the Neurosciences (3)
Introduces a collection of mathematical models increasingly important to research in psychology and neuroscience, including random walks, differential equations, linear systems theory, Fourier analysis, nonlinear systems, and neural modeling. Topics illustrated by examples from recent literature. Prerequisite: undergraduate statistics.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 527

PSYCH 528 Practical Methods for Behavioral Research (4, max. 8) Greenwald, Shoda
Examination of methodological, practical, and communication problems associated with research on human behavior. Topics include: selecting research problems, use of theory, types of validity, common sense about statistics, when to replicate, dealing with unpredicted results, strategies for presentation and publication. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 528

PSYCH 529 Advanced Research Methods (5)
Surveys advanced clinical research methods not covered in the required statistics sequence. Examples include structural equation modeling, hierarchical linear modeling, growth curve modeling, and taxometric analyses. Hands-on experience gained through weekly assignments using each method. Prerequisite: PSYCH 525.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 529

PSYCH 530 Introduction to Latent Variables (4) Greenwald
Analyses techniques to assess effects of latent variables in presence of error in observed data. Provides experience with statistical tools for confirmatory structural equation modeling and testing of hypotheses concerning causal and other relations among latent variable. Prerequisite: PSYCH 525, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 530

PSYCH 531 Research Methods in Clinical and Community Psychology (4) Lengua
Addresses issues concerning the design and implementation of research in clinical and community psychology. Topics include validity; reliability; experimental, quasi-, and non-experimental designs; causal inference; interpretation of data; and research ethics. Provides students with tools to evaluate research, develop hypotheses, and design rigorous empirical studies. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 531

PSYCH 532 Single Subject Design and Research (3) Kohlenberg
Single subject designs (reversal, multiple baseline, changing criterion) and their application to clinical cases. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in clinical psychology, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 532

PSYCH 535 Scientific Writing in Psychology (5, max. 10)
Addresses issues in scientific writing and publishing; laboratories assist with writing, and provide feedback on drafts of articles throughout the writing process. Students write a journal article to submit for publication. Other writing projects are also possible with instructor's permission. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 535

PSYCH 536 Grant Preparation in Psychology (3, max. 6) Mizumori
Prepare and submit an application for a major national fellowship. Joint registration in PSYCH 598 with faculty adviser is required. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology and permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 536

PSYCH 537 Teaching of Psychology (3) Passer
Examines issues concerning the teaching of psychology, including educational goals, course development, instructional methods, TA-student and TA-faculty relations, grading, student diversity, and problem situations. Assignments designed to enhance students' organizational, presentational, and problem-solving skills. Prerequisite: graduate standing in the Department of Psychology. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 537

PSYCH 538 Interactive Software for Psychological Research (4) Boynton, Fine, Loftus
Introduction to a variety of computing and programming skills with the goal of teaching how to design, program, and analyze experiments. Topics include principles of programming, the programming environment, presentation software, and data collection, management, and analysis. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 538

PSYCH 540 Advances in Psychology (3-5, max. 30)
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in psychology. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 540

PSYCH 541 Advances in Animal Behavior (3-5, max. 30) Barash, Beecher, Brenowitz, Kyes, Sisnersos
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in animal behavior. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 541

PSYCH 542 Advances in Behavioral Neuroscience (3-5, max. 30) Buck, Covey, Diaz, Kim, Mizumori, Olavarria
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in behavioral neuroscience. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 542

PSYCH 543 Advances in Child Clinical Psychology (3-5, max. 30) King, Lengua
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in child clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 543

PSYCH 544 Advances in Clinical Psychology (3-5, max. 30) George, Kohlenberg, Linehan, Smith, Zoellner
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in clinical psychology. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 544

PSYCH 545 Advances in Cognition/Perception (3-5, max. 30) Loftus
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in cognition/perception. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 545

PSYCH 546 Advances in Developmental Psychology (1-5, max. 30) Kahn, Meltzoff, Repacholi, Smoll, Sommerville
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in developmental psychology. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 546

PSYCH 547 Advances in Social/Personality (3-5, max. 30) Cheryan, Greenwald, Kaiser, Shoda
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in social psychology/personality. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 547

PSYCH 548 Advances in Quantitative Psychology (3-5, max. 30) Flaherty
Intensive readings from the current literature on an emerging topic or theoretical perspective in quantitative psychology. Student presentations and discussion. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 548

PSYCH 549 Seminar in Physiological Psychology (2) Diaz
Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 549

PSYCH 550 Seminar in Psychology (1-2, max. 30)
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 550

PSYCH 551 Seminar in Animal Behavior (1-2, max. 30) Barash, Beecher, Brenowitz, Sisneros
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 551

PSYCH 552 Seminar in Behavioral Neuroscience (1-2, max. 30) Buck, Covey, Diaz, Kenney, Mizumori, Olavarria
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 552

PSYCH 553 Seminar in Child Clinical Psychology (1-2, max. 30) King, Lengua
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 553

PSYCH 554 Seminar in Clinical Psychology (1-2, max. 30) George, Kohlenberg, Linehan, Simoni, Smith, Zoellner
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 554

PSYCH 555 Seminar in Cognition/Perception (1-2, max. 30) Bassok, Boynton, Buck, Fine, Kerr, Loftus, Murray
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 555

PSYCH 556 Seminar in Developmental Psychology (1-2, max. 30) Meltzoff, Repacholi, Smoll
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 556

PSYCH 557 Seminar in Social/Personality (1-2, max. 30) Brown, Cheryan, Greenwald, Kaiser, Leu, Shoda
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 557

PSYCH 558 Seminar in Quantitative Psychology (1-2, max. 30) Flaherty, Little, Miyamoto
Weekly meetings for discussion of current topics. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 558

PSYCH 560 Research Strategies (1-2, max. 30)
Group discussions of problems and continuing strategies for ongoing and future research projects. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology; others by permission of department.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 560

PSYCH 561 Current Trends in Psychology (*, max. 30)
Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 561

PSYCH 562 Evolutionary Psychology of Gender, Mating, and Reproduction (3) Barash, Beecher, Sisneros
Reviews evidence for biological factors influencing human mating and reproductive behavior, through application of concepts and theory from animal behavior, behavioral genetics, and evolutionary biology. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 562

PSYCH 563 Developmental Psychology and the Human Relationship with Nature (4) Kahn
Theories of development used to investigate the ontogenesis of the human relationship with nature. An emphasis on social cognition, children's environmental moral reasoning, the effects of technology in children's lives, and evolutionary theory. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 563

PSYCH 564 Advanced Attitude Theory (5) Greenwald
Theoretical, methodological, and empirical work on the concept of attitude and its practical applications. Topics include: definition of attitude, measurement of attitudes, information-processing theories, functional theories, cognitive structure theories, the self as attitude object, unconscious attitudinal processes. Prerequisite: PSYCH 445; PSYCH 525 or equivalent; or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 564

PSYCH 565 Quantifying Brain Analysis (3)
Covers concepts and applications of statistically unbiased methods for quantifying brain structure. Hands-on learning and application of concepts, sampling strategies and calculations for unbiased stereological measure of the size and number of various brain components.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 565

PSYCH 566 Neural Correlates of Perceptual Cognition (3) Olavarria
Contribution of sensory systems to perceptual capabilities. Critical review of literature on the neural correlates of abilities such as sensory discrimination, subjective perception, attention, imagery, object and face recognition, and spatial behavior. Some sensory disabilities reviewed. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 566

PSYCH 567 Higher Order Cognition (3) Bassok
Survey of research on higher-order cognition with an emphasis on theoretical accounts of knowledge representation. Topics include problem solving, inductive and deductive reasoning, hypothesis testing, causal inferences, similarity judgments, and categorization.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 567

PSYCH 568 Cognitive Approaches to Human Memory (3)
Examination of current topics in human memory from the perspective of cognitive psychology. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 568

PSYCH 570 Child Clinical Psychology (4)
Issues and content of child clinical psychology, promotion of student's beginning work in research. Prerequisite: graduate major or minor standing in child-clinical psychology.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 570

PSYCH 571 Child Psychopathology (5)
Broad survey of major categories of child and adolescent disorders. Emphasis on scientific, empirical approach to description, classification, and research literature on these disorders. Required for all graduate students majoring in child clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 571

PSYCH 572 Approaches to Child Treatment (4)
Major approaches to child psychotherapy, including specific applications, issues in treatment, and research. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in child-clinical psychology, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 572

PSYCH 573 Psychological Assessment of Children (5)
Assessment techniques appropriate to children, including those for infants, special problems of preschool and school-age children; projective tests, family interviews, and target observational assessment; training in administration of selected techniques. Prerequisite: PSYCH 576 and permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 573

PSYCH 574 Community Psychology (4)
Overview of key issues and concepts in the field of community psychology. History of field and overview of different models used to conceptualize system-level mental health issues and delivery systems. Emphasizes theory and research rather than intervention. Prerequisite: psychology graduate student, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 574

PSYCH 575 Anxiety Disorders (3) Zoellner
General topics related to primary anxiety disorders (panic, OCD, GAD, posttraumatic stress disorder, and specific phobias), including diagnosis, theory, and treatment.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 575

PSYCH 576 Assessment of Intelligence (5) King, Lengua
Current theory and research on intelligence and intelligence testing; training in administration, scoring, and interpretation of major intelligence tests; ethical issues in assessment. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in child-clinical or clinical psychology, or graduate minor standing in child-clinical psychology. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 576

PSYCH 577 Psychological Assessment (3)
Provides a foundation in the theory underlying adult assessment as well as training in specific adult assessment techniques. Focuses on behavioral and cognitive assessment. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 577

PSYCH 578 Approaches to Psychological Assessment (4)
Problem-solving approach to psychological assessment; review of psychological tests and procedures and presentation of approaches to their clinical interpretation and use. Required for all graduate students majoring in clinical and child-clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in clinical psychology. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 578

PSYCH 579 Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Group Training (3) Linehan
In-depth learning of skills training component of dialectical behavior therapy, an empirically supported treatment approach for high risk clinical populations. Topics include skills in mindfulness, emotion regulation, interpersonal effectiveness and distress tolerance. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 579

PSYCH 580 Minority Mental Health (3) Barrett, George, Simoni
Surveys topics on mental health and treatment of racial and ethnic minorities. Theory emphases include: models addressing ethnic identity, cross-cultural differences, models of culturally sensitive intervention. Practice emphases include unique psychotherapy strategies for: African-, Asian-, and Latino-Americans, and American Indians. Prerequisite: graduate clinical major standing in psychology, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 580

PSYCH 581 Cross-Cultural Competency I (2) George
Focuses on development of multicultural competence in the provision of psychological services to meet APA guidelines for ethnic, linguistic, and culturally diverse populations. Students address personal development, increase their knowledge of diverse groups, and study effective models of intervention in working with clients of diverse backgrounds. Prerequisite: PSYCH 580.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 581

PSYCH 582 Cross-Cultural Competency II (2) George
Third in the graduate multicultural-competence sequence. Focuses on American ethnic minorities, multiracial children and families, social action, and organizational development. Prerequisite: PSYCH 581.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 582

PSYCH 583 Introduction to Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (3) Linehan
Introduces dialectical behavioral therapy, an empirically supported treatment approach for high risk clinical populations. Topics include mindfulness, dialectics, validation, behavioral therapy, and case conceptualization. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 583

PSYCH 584 Behavioral Methods: Clinical Interventions (3) Linehan
Provides students with basic skills required for competent practice of cognitive and behavioral therapies. Topics include behavioral skills training, cognitive restructuring, contingency management, and exposure-based procedures. Prerequisite: second year of graduate clinical psychology, social work, psychosocial nursing, or psychiatric residency.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 584

PSYCH 585 Methods in Suicide and Crisis Intervention (3) Linehan
Provides a foundation for risk assessment and crisis intervention with suicidal individuals. Addresses risk factors for suicide across the age range, and methods for both behavioral interventions and crisis management with suicidal individuals. Also covers ethical issues. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 585

PSYCH 586 Clinical Personality Assessment (3) Smith
Use of objective personality inventories in the description of normal and abnormal personality and use of such information in case conceptualization and treatment planning. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory. Prerequisite: clinical psychology graduate standing. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 586

PSYCH 587 Clinical Methods: Interviewing (2) Fagan
Provides the foundation for developing good clinical skills. Enables students to conduct an initial clinical interview and generate a diagnostic formulation, problem list, and treatment plan after taking a complete history. Limited to and required of all second-year clinical psychology graduate students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 587

PSYCH 588 Clinical Methods: Ethics (3) Fagan
Enables students to acquire a thorough working knowledge of the American Psychological Association's Ethical Standards for Psychologists; an awareness of Washington state law as it affects psychologists and a knowledge of how to identify and solve ethical dilemmas. Limited to and required of all second-year clinical psychology graduate students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 588

PSYCH 589 Clinical Supervision (4, max. 100) George, King, Kohlenberg, Lengua, Linehan, Simoni, Smith, Zoellner
Supervised psychotherapy involving several individual clients. Separate consultations with instructor for intensive supervision of each case. Occasional meetings in small groups of instructors and students to discuss case material. Assigned readings appropriate to each case with opportunities to discuss these with instructor. Prerequisite: clinical psychology graduate standing and permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 589

PSYCH 590 Practicum in Psychological Assessment (2)
Demonstration and practice of selected psychological test procedures and interviewing skills. Concurrent registration in PSYCH 576 or PSYCH 578 required. Required for all first-year graduate students majoring in clinical and child-clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in clinical or child-clinical psychology and permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 590

PSYCH 591 Issues in Clinical Psychology (1, max. 3) Smith
Personal and professional issues in clinical psychology. Required for all first-year graduate students majoring in clinical and child-clinical psychology. Prerequisite: graduate major standing in clinical psychology. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 591

PSYCH 593 Clinical Practica and Colloquium (1-6, max. 99) Fagan
Required of all clinical psychology graduate students seeing clients in the clinic. Clinical colloquium required of all second-year students, optional for others. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 593

PSYCH 594 Advanced Clinical Practicum (1-6, max. 55) Kohlenberg, Linehan, Smith, Zoellner
Advanced supervised training in specific empirically supported treatment approaches. Each practicum provides intensive training in a specific treatment, such as dialectical behavior therapy, functional analytic psychotherapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, mindfulness-based relapse prevention, and exposure treatment for anxiety disorders. Prerequisite: graduate standing in clinical psychology; PSYCH 593; permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 594

PSYCH 596 Advanced Teaching Practicum (2, max. 6)
Supervised participation in graduate teaching. Prerequisite: graduate student in psychology and permission of instructor. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 596

PSYCH 597 Fieldwork in Clinical Psychology (1-5, max. 36) George, King, Kohlenberg, Lengua, Linehan, Simoni, Smith, Zoellner
Prerequisite: second-year graduate major standing and permission of departmental faculty.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 597

PSYCH 598 Directed Reading in Psychology (*, max. 30)
Selected topics. Prerequisite: permission of a supervising psychology faculty member.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 598

PSYCH 599 Directed Research in Psychology (1-3, max. 24)
Supervised participation in research. Prerequisite: permission of a supervising psychology faculty member.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 599

PSYCH 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 600

PSYCH 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 700

PSYCH 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: PSYCH 800

STAT 100 Numbers and Reason (5) QSR Bookstein
Surveys the standard ways in which "arithmetic turns into understanding" across examples from the natural and the social sciences. Main concepts include abduction (inference to the best explanation), consilience (numerical agreement across multiple measurement levels), bell curves, linear models, and the likelihood of hypothesis. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 100

STAT 111 Lectures in Applied Statistics (1) NW
Weekly lectures illustrating the importance of statisticians in a variety of fields, including medicine and the biological, physical, and social sciences. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with BIOST 111; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 111

STAT 220 Principles of Statistical Reasoning (5) NW, QSR
Introduces statistical reasoning. Focuses primarily on the what and why rather than the how. Helps students gain an understanding of the rationale behind many statistical methods, as well as an appreciation of the use and misuse of statistics. Encourages and requires critical thinking. (Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 220, STAT 221/CS&SS 221/SOC 221, STAT 311, and ECON 311.) Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 220

STAT 221 Statistical Concepts and Methods for the Social Sciences (5) NW, QSR
Develops statistical literacy. Examines objectives and pitfalls of statistical studies; study designs, data analysis, inference; graphical and numerical summaries of numerical and categorical data; correlation and regression; and estimation, confidence intervals, and significance tests. Emphasizes social science examples and cases. (Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 220, STAT 221, STAT 311, STAT 221/CS&SS 221/SOC 221, and ECON 311.) Offered: jointly with CS&SS 221/SOC 221; AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 221

STAT 302 Statistical Software and Its Applications (3)
Introduction to data structures and basics of implementing procedures in statistical computing packages, selected from but not limited to R, SAS, STATA, MATLAB, SPSS, and Minitab. Provides a foundation in computation components of data analysis. Prerequisite: either STAT 311/ECON 311 or STAT 390/MATH 390. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 302

STAT 311 Elements of Statistical Methods (5) NW, QSR
Elementary concepts of probability and sampling; binomial and normal distributions. Basic concepts of hypothesis testing, estimation, and confidence intervals; t-tests and chi-square tests. Linear regression theory and the analysis of variance. (Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 220, STAT 221, STAT 311, and ECON 311.) Prerequisite: either MATH 111, MATH 120, MATH 124, MATH 127, or MATH 144. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 311

STAT 316 Design of Experiments and Regression Analysis (4) NW Kapur
Introduction to the analysis of data from planned experiments. Analysis of variance for multiple factors and applications of orthogonal arrays and linear graphs for fractional factorial designs to product and process design optimization. Regression analysis with applications in engineering. Prerequisite: IND E 315. Offered: jointly with IND E 316; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 316

STAT 320 Evaluating Social Science Evidence (5) I&S, QSR
A critical introduction to the methods used to collect data in social science: surveys, archival research, experiments, and participant observation. Evaluates "facts and findings" by understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the methods that produce them. Case based. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 320/SOC 320.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 320

STAT 321 Case-Based Social Statistics I (5) I&S, QSR
Introduction to statistical reasoning for social scientists. Built around cases representing in-depth investigations into the nature and content of statistical and social-science principles and practice. Hands-on approach: weekly data-analysis laboratory. Fundamental statistical topics: measurement, exploratory data analysis, probabilistic concepts, distributions, assessment of statistical evidence. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 321/SOC 321; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 321

STAT 322 Case-Based Social Statistics II (5) I&S, QSR
Continuation of CS&SS 321/SOC 321/STAT 321. Progresses to questions of assessing the weight of evidence and more sophisticated models including regression-based methods. Built around cases investigating the nature and content of statistical principles and practice. Hands-on approach: weekly data analysis laboratory. Prerequisite: CS&SS 321/SOC 321/STAT 321, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 322/SOC 322; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 322

STAT 340 Introduction to Probability and Mathematical Statistics I (4) QSR
Covers the fundamentals of probability and mathematical statistics; axioms of probability, conditional and joint probability, random variables, univariate and multivariate distributions and densities, and moments; bionomial, negative binomial, geometric, Poisson, normal, exponential distributions, and central limit theorem; and basic estimation and hypothesis testing theory. Prerequisite: either STAT 311/ECON 311 or STAT 390/MATH 390; either a minimum grade of 2.5 in MATH 327 or MATH 136. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 340

STAT 341 Introduction to Probability and Statistical Inference I (4) NW
Brief review of: sample spaces, random variables, probability. Distribution: binomial, normal, Poisson, geometric. Followed by: expectation, variance, central limit theorem. Basic concepts of estimation, testing, and confidence intervals. Maximum likelihood estimators and likelihood ratio tests, efficiency. Introduction to regression. Prerequisite: either STAT 340 or STAT/MATH 394 and STAT/MATH 395; either STAT/ECON 311 or STAT/MATH 390; either a minimum grade of 2.5 in MATH 136 or MATH 327. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 341

STAT 342 Introduction to Probability and Statistical Inference II (4) NW
Brief review of: sample spaces, random variables, probability. Distribution: binomial, normal, Poisson, geometric. Followed by: expectation, variance, central limit theorem. Basic concepts of estimation, testing, and confidence intervals. Maximum likelihood estimators and likelihood ratio tests, efficiency. Introduction to regression. Prerequisite: STAT 341. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 342

STAT 390 Statistical Methods in Engineering and Science (4) NW
Concepts of probability and statistics. Conditional probability, independence, random variables, distribution functions. Descriptive statistics, transformations, sampling errors, confidence intervals, least squares and maximum likelihood. Exploratory data analysis and interactive computing. Students may receive credit for only one of STAT 390, STAT 481/ECON 481, and ECON 580. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136. Offered: jointly with MATH 390; AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 390

STAT 391 Probability and Statistics for Computer Science (4) NW
Fundamentals of probability and statistics from the perspective of the computer scientist. Random variables, distributions and densities, conditional probability, independence. Maximum likelihood, density estimation, Markov chains, classification. Applications in computer science. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.5 in MATH 126; 2.5 in MATH 308; either CSE 326, CSE 332, CSE 373, CSE 417, or CSE 421. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 391

STAT 394 Probability I (3) NW
Sample spaces; basic axioms of probability; combinatorial probability; conditional probability and independence; binomial, Poisson, and normal distributions. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126 or MATH 136; recommended: either MATH 324 or MATH 327. Offered: jointly with MATH 394; AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 394

STAT 395 Probability II (3) NW
Random variables; expectation and variance; laws of large numbers; normal approximation and other limit theorems; multidimensional distributions and transformations. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in STAT/MATH 394. Offered: jointly with MATH 395; WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 395

STAT 396 Probability III (3) NW
Characteristic functions and generating functions; recurrent events and renewal theory; random walk. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with MATH 396; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 396

STAT 403 Introduction to Resampling Inference (4) NW V. MININ
Introduction to computer-intensive data analysis for experimental and observational studies in empirical sciences. Students design, program, carry out, and report applications of bootstrap resampling, rerandomization, and subsampling of cases. Experience programming in R is beneficial. Credit allowed for STAT 403 or STAT 503 but not both. Prerequisite: either STAT 311/ECON 311, STAT 341, STAT 390/MATH 390, STAT 481/ECON 481, or Q SCI 381 and Q SCI 482; recommended: Q SCI 483, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: jointly with Q SCI 403; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 403

STAT 421 Applied Statistics and Experimental Design (4) NW
Computer-aided data analyses using comparisons between batches, analysis of variance and regression. Evaluation of assumptions, data transformation, reliability of statistical measures (jackknife, bootstrap). Fisher-Gosset controversy. Prerequisite: either STAT 342 or STAT 481/ECON 481; recommended: MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 421

STAT 423 Applied Regression and Analysis of Variance (4) NW
Regression analysis. Problems in interpreting regression coefficients. Estimation, including two-stage least squares. Guided regression: building linear models, selecting carriers. Regression residuals. Analysis of variance. Nonparametric regression. Factorial designs, response surface methods. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, STAT 421, or STAT 481/ECON 481; recommended: MATH 308. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 423

STAT 425 Introduction to Nonparametric Statistics (3) NW
Overview of nonparametric methods, such as rank tests, goodness of fit tests, 2 x 2 tables, nonparametric estimation. Useful for students with only a statistical methods course background. Prerequisite: STAT 390/MATH 390. Offered: jointly with BIOST 425.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 425

STAT 427 Introduction to Analysis of Categorical Data (4) NW
Techniques for analysis of count data. Log-linear models, logistic regression, and analysis of ordered response categories. Illustrations from the behavioral and biological sciences. Computational procedures. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, STAT 362, or STAT 421.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 427

STAT 428 Multivariate Analysis for the Social Sciences (4) NW
Multivariate techniques commonly used in the social and behavioral sciences. Linear models for dependence analysis (multivariate regression, MANOVA, and discriminant analysis) and for interdependence analysis (principal components and factor analysis). Techniques applied to social science data using computer statistical packages. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, STAT 362, or STAT 421.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 428

STAT 480 Sampling Theory for Biologists (3) NW J. SKALSKI
Theory and applications of sampling finite populations including: simple random sampling, stratified random sampling, ratio estimates, regression estimates, systematic sampling, cluster sampling, sample size determinations, applications in fisheries and forestry. Other topics include sampling plant and animal populations, sampling distributions, estimation of parameters and statistical treatment of data. Prerequisite: Q SCI 482; recommended: Q SCI 483. Offered: jointly with Q SCI 480; W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 480

STAT 486 Experimental Design (4) NW
Emphasizes data modeling using structured means resulting from choice of experimental and treatment design. Examines experimental designs, including crossed, nested designs; block; split-plot designs; and covariance analysis. Also covers multiple comparisons, efficiency, power, sample size, and pseudo-replication. Prerequisite: Q SCI 482; recommended: Q SCI 483. Offered: jointly with Q SCI 486; W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 486

STAT 491 Introduction to Stochastic Processes (3) NW
Random walks, Markov chains, branching processes, Poisson process, point processes, birth and death processes, queuing theory, stationary processes. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with MATH 491; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 491

STAT 492 Stochastic Calculus for Option Pricing (3) NW
Introductory stochastic calculus mathematical foundation for pricing options and derivatives. Basic stochastic analysis tools, including stochastic integrals, stochastic differential equations, Ito's formula, theorems of Girsanov and Feynman-Kac, Black-Scholes option pricing, American and exotic options, bond options. Prerequisite: either MATH 394 or STAT 394; either MATH 395 or STAT 395. Offered: jointly with MATH 492; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 492

STAT 495 Service Learning: K-12 Tutoring Experience (1-5, max. 5) Morita
Tutoring mathematics in local K-12 schools. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 495

STAT 498 Special Topics (1-5, max. 15) NW
Reading and lecture course intended for special needs of students.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 498

STAT 499 Undergraduate Research (1-5, max. 15)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 499

STAT 502 Design and Analysis of Experiments (4)
Design of experiments covering concepts such as randomization, blocking, and confounding. Analysis of experiments using randomization tests, analysis of variance, and analysis of covariance. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, MATH 390/STAT 390, ECON 481/STAT 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580 or equivalent; MATH 308 or equivalent. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 502

STAT 503 Practical Methods for Data Analysis (4)
Basic exploratory data analysis with business examples. Data summaries, multivariate data, time series, multiway tables. Techniques include graphical display, transformation, outlier identification, cluster analysis, smoothing, regression, robustness. Departmental credit allowed for only one of 403 and 503. Prerequisite: B A 500 or QMETH 500 or equivalent or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with QMETH 503.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 503

STAT 504 Applied Regression (4)
Least squares estimation. Hypothesis testing. Interpretation of regression coefficients. Categorical independent variables. Interactions. Assumption violations: outliers, residuals, robust regression; nonlinearity, transformations, ACE, CART; nonconstant variance. Variable selection and model averaging. Prerequisite: either STAT 342, STAT 390/MATH 390, STAT 421, STAT 481/ECON 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, or SOC 425; recommended: MATH 308. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 504.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 504

STAT 506 Applied Probability and Statistics (4)
Discrete and continuous random variables, independence and conditional probability, central limit theorem, elementary statistical estimation and inference, linear regression. Emphasis on physical applications. Prerequisite: some advanced calculus and linear algebra. Offered: jointly with AMATH 506.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 506

STAT 509 Introduction to Mathematical Statistics: Econometrics I (5) NW
Examines methods, tools, and theory of mathematical statistics. Covers, probability densities, transformations, moment generating functions, conditional expectation. Bayesian analysis with conjugate priors, hypothesis tests, the Neyman-Pearson Lemma. Likelihood ratio tests, confidence intervals, maximum likelihood estimation, Central limit theorem, Slutsky Theorems, and the delta-method. (Credit allowed for only one of STAT 390, STAT 481, and ECON 580.) Prerequisite: STAT 311/ECON 311; either MATH 136 or MATH 126 with either MATH 308 or MATH 309; recommended: MATH 324. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 509/ECON 580; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 509

STAT 512 Statistical Inference (4)
Review of random variables; transformations, conditional expectation, moment generating functions, convergence, limit theorems, estimation; Cramer-Rao lower bound, maximum likelihood estimation, sufficiency, ancillarity, completeness. Rao-Blackwell theorem. Hypothesis testing: Neyman-Pearson lemma, monotone likelihood ratio, likelihood-ratio tests, large-sample theory. Contingency tables, confidence intervals, invariance. Introduction to decision theory. Prerequisite: STAT 395 and STAT 421, STAT 423, STAT 504, or BIOST 512 (concurrent registration permitted for these three). Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 512

STAT 513 Statistical Inference (4)
Review of random variables; transformations, conditional expectation, moment generating functions, convergence, limit theorems, estimation; Cramer-Rao lower bound, maximum likelihood estimation, sufficiency, ancillarity, completeness. Rao-Blackwell theorem. Hypothesis testing: Neyman-Pearson lemma, monotone likelihood ratio, likelihood-ratio tests, large-sample theory. Contingency tables, confidence intervals, invariance. Introduction to decision theory. Prerequisite: STAT 512. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 513

STAT 516 Stochastic Modeling of Scientific Data (3-)
Covers discrete-time Markov chain theory; inference for discrete-time Markov chains; Monte Carlo methods; missing data; hidden Markov models; and Gaussian Markov random fields. Prerequisite: either STAT 342 or STAT 396. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 516

STAT 517 Stochastic Modeling of Scientific Data (-3)
Covers Markov random fields; continuous-time Markov chains; birth-death and branching processes; and point processes and cluster models. Procedures for inference for these stochastic processes, including Likelihood methods and estimating equations. Prerequisite: STAT 516. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 517

STAT 518 Stochastic Modeling Project (3)
Student in-depth analyses, oral presentations, and discussion of selected research articles focusing on stochastic modeling of, and inference for, scientific data. Prerequisite: STAT 517 and permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 518

STAT 519 Time Series Analysis (3)
Descriptive techniques. Stationary and nonstationary processes, including ARIMA processes. Estimation of process mean and autocovariance function. Fitting ARIMA models to data. Statistical tests for white noise. Forecasting. State space models and the Kalman filter. Robust time series analysis. Regression analysis with correlated errors. Statistical properties of long memory processes. Prerequisite: STAT 513.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 519

STAT 520 Spectral Analysis of Time Series (4)
Estimation of spectral densities for single and multiple time series. Nonparametric estimation of spectral density, cross-spectral density, and coherency for stationary time series, real and complex spectrum techniques. Bispectrum. Digital filtering techniques. Aliasing, prewhitening. Choice of lag windows and data windows. Use of the fast Fourier transform. The parametric autoregressive spectral density estimate for single and multiple stationary time series. Spectral analysis of nonstationary random processes and for randomly sampled processes. Techniques of robust spectral analysis. Prerequisite: one of STAT 342, STAT 390, STAT 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, or IND E 315. Offered: jointly with E E 520.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 520

STAT 521 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with MATH 521; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 521

STAT 522 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with MATH 522; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 522

STAT 523 Advanced Probability (3)
Measure theory and integration, independence, laws of large numbers. Fourier analysis of distributions, central limit problem and infinitely divisible laws, conditional expectations, martingales. Prerequisite: either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: jointly with MATH 523; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 523

STAT 524 Design of Medical Studies (3)
Design of medical studies, with emphasis on randomized controlled clinical trials. Bias elimination, controls, treatment assignment and randomization, precision, replication, power and sample size calculations, stratification, and ethics. Suitable for graduate students in biostatistics and for research-oriented graduate students in other scientific fields. Prerequisite: BIOST 511 or equivalent, and one of BIOST 513, BIOST 518, STAT 421, STAT 423, STAT 512, or EPI 512; or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 524; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 524

STAT 527 Nonparametric Regression and Classification (3) Minin, Raftery, Richardson, Wakefield
Covers techniques for smoothing and classification including spline models, kernel methods, generalized additive models, and the averaging of multiple models. Describes measures of predictive performance, along with methods for balancing bias and variance. Prerequisite: either STAT 502 and STAT 504 or BIOST 514 and BIOST 515. Offered: jointly with BIOST 527; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 527

STAT 528 Applied Statistics Capstone (3) McCormick, Sampson, Wakefield
Covers technical and non-technical aspects of applied statistics work, building on methods taught in prerequisite courses. Key elements include: study design, determining the aim of the analysis, choosing an appropriate method, and report writing. Prerequisite: STAT 502; STAT 504; STAT 536; STAT 570. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 528

STAT 529 Sample Survey Techniques (3)
Design and implementation of selection and estimation procedures. Emphasis on human populations. Simple, stratified, and cluster sampling; multistage and two-phase procedures; optimal allocation of resources; estimation theory; replicated designs; variance estimation; national samples and census materials. Prerequisite: either STAT 421, STAT 423, STAT 504, QMETH 500, BIOST 511, or BIOST 517, or equivalent; or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 529/CS&SS 529.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 529

STAT 530 Wavelets: Data Analysis, Algorithms, and Theory (3)
Review of spectral analysis. Theory of continuous and discrete wavelets. Multiresolution analysis. Computation of discrete wavelet transform. Time-scale analysis. Wavelet packets. Statistical properties of wavelet signal extraction and smoothers. Estimation of wavelet variance. Prerequisite: some Fourier theory and linear algebra; MATH 390/STAT 390, ECON 481 or STAT 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, STAT 513, or IND E 315. Offered: jointly with E E 530; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 530

STAT 533 Theory of Linear Models (3)
Examines model structure; least squares estimation; Gauss-Markov theorem; central limit theorems for linear regression; weighted and generalized least squares; fixed and random effects; analysis of variance; blocking and stratification; and applications in experimental design. Prerequisite: STAT 421 or STAT 423; and STAT 513, BIOST 515, and a course in matrix algebra. Offered: jointly with BIOST 533; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 533

STAT 534 Statistical Computing (3)
Introduction to scientific computing. Includes programming tools, modern programming methodologies, (modularization, object oriented design), design of data structures and algorithms, numerical computing and graphics. Uses C++ for several substantial scientific programming projects. Prerequisite: experience with programming in a high level language. Offered: jointly with BIOST 534; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 534

STAT 535 Statistical Learning: Modeling, Prediction, and Computing (3)
Covers statistical learning over discrete multivariate domains, exemplified by graphical probability models. Emphasizes the algorithmic and computational aspects of these models. Includes additional topics in probability and statistics of discrete structures, general purpose discrete optimization algorithms like dynamic programming and minimum spanning tree, and applications to data analysis. Prerequisite: experience with programming in a high level language. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 535

STAT 536 Analysis of Categorical and Count Data (3)
Analysis of categorical data in the social sciences. Binary, ordered, and multinomial outcomes, event counts, and contingency tables. Focuses on maximum likelihood estimations and interpretations of results. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505 and CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 536/SOC 536; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 536

STAT 538 Statistical Learning: Modeling, Prediction, and Computing (3)
Reviews optimization and convex optimization in its relation to statistics. Covers the basics of unconstrained and constrained convex optimization, basics of clustering and classification, entropy, KL divergence and exponential family models, duality, modern learning algorithms like boosting, support vector machines, and variational approximations in inference. Prerequisite: experience with programming in a high level language. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 538

STAT 539 Statistical Learning: Modeling, Prediction and Computing (3) Meila
Supervised, applied project in statistical modeling, prediction, and computing. Prerequisite: STAT 535; STAT 538; computer programming at intermediate level. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 539

STAT 542 Multivariate Analysis (3)
Multivariate normal distribution; partial and multiple correlation; Hotelling's T2; Bartlett's decomposition; various likelihood ratio tests; discriminant analysis; principal components; graphical Markov models. Prerequisite: STAT 582 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 542

STAT 544 Bayesian Statistical Methods (3)
Statistical methods based on the idea of a probability distribution over the parameter space. Coherence and utility. Subjective probability. Likelihood principle. Conjugate families. Structure of Bayesian inference. Limit theory for posterior distributions. Sequential experiments. Exchangeability. Bayesian nonparametrics. Empirical Bayes methods. Prerequisite: STAT 513 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 544

STAT 547 Options and Derivatives (4)
Covers theory, computation, and statistics of options and derivatives pricing, including options on stocks, stock indices, futures, currencies, and interest rate derivatives. Prerequisite: STAT 506 or permission of instructor; recommended: ECON 424.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 547

STAT 548 Machine Learning for Big Data (4) Fox, Guestrin
Covers machine learning and statistical techniques for analyzing datasets of massive size and dimensionality. Representations include regularized linear models, graphical models, matrix factorization, sparsity, clustering, and latent factor models. Algorithms include sketching, random projections, hashing, fast nearest-neighbors, large-scale online learning, and parallel learning (Map-Reduce, GraphLab). Prerequisite: either STAT 535 or CSE 546. Offered: jointly with CSE 547; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 548

STAT 549 Statistical Methods for Portfolios (4)
Covers the fundamentals of modern statistical portfolio construction and risk measurement, including theoretical foundations, statistical methodology, and computational methods using modern object-oriented software for data analysis, statistical modeling, and numerical portfolio optimization. Prerequisite: ECON 424 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 549

STAT 550 Statistical Genetics I: Mendelian Traits (3)
Mendelian genetic traits. Population genetics; Hardy-Weinberg, allelic variation, subdivision. Likelihood inference, information and power; latent variables and EM algorithm. Pedigree relationships and gene identity. Meiosis and recombination. Linkage detection. Multipoint linkage analysis. Prerequisite: STAT 390 and STAT 394, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 550; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 550

STAT 551 Statistical Genetics II: Quantitative Traits (3)
Statistical basis for describing variation in quantitative traits. Decomposition of trait variation into components representing genes, environment and gene-environment interaction. Methods of mapping and characterizing quantitative trait loci. Prerequisite: STAT/BIOST 550; STAT 423 or BIOST 515; or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 551; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 551

STAT 552 Statistical Genetics III: Design and Analysis (3)
Overview of probability models, inheritance models, penetrance. Association and linkage. The lod score method. Affected sib method. Fitting complex inheritance models. Design mapping studies; multipoint, disequilibrium, and fine-scale mapping. Ascertainment. Prerequisite: STAT/BIOST 551; GENOME 371; or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 552; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 552

STAT 560 Hierarchical Modeling for the Social Sciences (4)
Explores ways in which data are hierarchically organized, such as voters nested within electoral districts that are in turn nested within states. Provides a basic theoretical understanding and practical knowledge of models for clustered data and a set of tools to help make accurate inferences. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506 or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505, CS&SS 506 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 560/SOC 560.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 560

STAT 561 Special Topics in Applied Statistics (1-5, max. 15)
Data analysis, spectral analysis or robust estimation. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 561

STAT 562 Special Topics in Applied Statistics (1-5, max. 15)
Data analysis, spectral analysis or robust estimation. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 562

STAT 564 Bayesian Statistics for the Social Sciences (4)
Statistical methods based on the idea of probability as a measure of uncertainty. Topics covered include subjective notion of probability, Bayes' Theorem, prior and posterior distributions, and data analysis techniques for statistical models. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506 or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505; CS&SS 506. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 564.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 564

STAT 566 Causal Modeling (4)
Construction of causal hypotheses. Theories of causation, counterfactuals, intervention vs. passive observation. Contexts for causal inference: randomized experiments; sequential randomization; partial compliance; natural experiments, passive observation. Path diagrams, conditional independence, and d-separation. Model equivalence and causal under-determination. Prerequisite: course in statistics, SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505, CS&SS 506, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 566.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 566

STAT 567 Statistical Analysis of Social Networks (4)
Statistical and mathematical descriptions of social networks. Topics include graphical and matrix representations of social networks, sampling methods, statistical analysis of network data, and applications. Prerequisite: SOC 504, SOC 505, SOC 506, or equivalent; recommended: CS&SS 505; CS&SS 506. Offered: jointly with CS&SS 567.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 567

STAT 570 Advanced Regression Methods for Independent Data (3)
Covers linear models, generalized linear and non-linear regression, and models. Includes interpretation of parameters, including collapsibility and non-collapsibility, estimating equations; likelihood; sandwich estimations; the bootstrap; Bayesian inference: prior specification, hypothesis testing, and computation; comparison of approaches; and diagnostics. Prerequisite: STAT 512 and STAT 513;BIOST/STAT 533 or STAT 421/STAT 502 and STAT 423/STAT 504; a course in matrix algebra. Offered: jointly with BIOST 570; A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 570

STAT 571 Advanced Regression Methods for Dependent Data (3)
Covers longitudinal data models, generalized linear and non-linear mixed models; marginal versus conditional models; generalized estimating equations, likelihood-based inference, REML, BLUP, and computation of integrals; Bayesian inference: Markov chain Monte Carlo; covariance models, including models for split plot designs; comparison of approaches; and diagnostics. Prerequisite: BIOST570/STAT 570. Offered: jointly with BIOST 571; W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 571

STAT 572 Advanced Regression Methods: Project (3)
Student presentations and discussion on selected methodological research articles focusing on regression modeling. Prerequisite: STAT 571. Offered: jointly with BIOST 572; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 572

STAT 576 Statistical Methods for Survival Data (3)
Statistical methods for censored survival data arising from follow-up studies on human or animal populations. Parametric and nonparametric methods, Kaplan-Meier survival curve estimator, comparison of survival curves, log-rank test, regression models including the Cox proportional hazards model, competing risks. Prerequisite: STAT 581 and either BIOST 515, STAT 473, or equivalent. Offered: jointly with BIOST 576.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 576

STAT 578 Special Topics in Advanced Biostatistics (*, max. 30)
Advanced-level topics in biostatistics offered by regular and visiting faculty. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 578; AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 578

STAT 579 Data Analysis and Reporting (2, max. 8)
Analysis of real data to answer scientific questions. Common data-analytic problems. Sensible approaches to complex data. Graphical and tabular presentation of results. Writing reports for scientific journals, research collaborators, consulting clients. Graduate standing in statistics or biostatistics or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with BIOST 579; AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 579

STAT 581 Advanced Theory of Statistical Inference (3)
Limit theorems, asymptotic methods, asymptotic efficiency and efficiency bounds for estimation, maximum likelihood estimation, Bayes methods, asymptotics via derivatives of functionals, sample-based estimates of variability: (bootstrap and jackknife); robustness; estimation for dependent data, nonparametric estimation and testing. Prerequisite: STAT 513; either MATH 426 or MATH 576. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 581

STAT 582 Advanced Theory of Statistical Inference (3)
Limit theorems, asymptotic methods, asymptotic efficiency and efficiency bounds for estimation, maximum likelihood estimation, Bayes methods, asymptotics via derivatives of functionals, sample-based estimates of variability: (bootstrap and jackknife); robustness; estimation for dependent data, nonparametric estimation and testing. Prerequisite: STAT 581. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 582

STAT 583 Advanced Theory of Statistical Inference (3)
Limit theorems, asymptotic methods, asymptotic efficiency and efficiency bounds for estimation, maximum likelihood estimation, Bayes methods, asymptotics via derivatives of functionals, sample-based estimates of variability: (bootstrap and jackknife); robustness; estimation for dependent data, nonparametric estimation and testing. Prerequisite: STAT 582. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 583

STAT 590 Statistics Seminar (*, max. 15)
Prerequisite: permission of graduate program coordinator. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 590

STAT 591 Special Topics in Statistics (1-5, max. 15)
Distribution-free inference, game and decision theory, advanced theory of estimation (including sequential estimation), robustness, advanced probability theory, stochastic processes or empirical processes. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 591

STAT 592 Special Topics in Statistics (1-5, max. 15)
Distribution-free inference, game and decision theory, advanced theory of estimation (including sequential estimation), robustness, advanced probability theory, stochastic processes or empirical processes. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 592

STAT 593 Special Topics in Statistics (1-5, max. 15)
Distribution-free inference, game and decision theory, advanced theory of estimation (including sequential estimation), robustness, advanced probability theory, stochastic processes or empirical processes. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 593

STAT 598 Techniques of Statistical Consulting (1)
Seminar series covering technical and non-technical aspects of statistical consulting, including skills for effective communication with clients, report writing, statistical tips and rules of thumb, issues in survey sampling, and issues in working as a statistical consultant in academic, industrial, and private-practice settings. Prerequisite: entry code. Offered: jointly with BIOST 598; ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 598

STAT 599 Statistical Consulting (*, max. 12)
Consulting experience in data analysis, applied statistics. Student required to provide consulting services to students and faculty three hours per week. Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 599

STAT 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 600

STAT 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 700

STAT 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: STAT 800

A A 198 Special Topics in Aeronautics and Astronautics (1-5, max. 10) NW Knowlen
Introduces the field of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Topics include aircraft flight, rocket propulsion, space travel, and contemporary space missions. May include hands-on activities. For non-majors.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 198

A A 210 Engineering Statics (4) NW
Applies vector analysis to equilibrium of rigid body systems and subsystems. Includes force and moment resultants, free body diagrams, internal forces, and friction. Analyzes basic structural and machine systems and components. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126 or MATH 136; minimum grade of 2.0 in PHYS 121. Offered: AWS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 210

A A 260 Thermodynamics (4) NW
Introduction to the basic principles of thermodynamics from a macroscopic point of view. Emphasis on the First and Second Laws and the State Principle, problem solving methodology. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either CHEM 140, CHEM 142, CHEM 144, or CHEM 145; minimum grade of 2.0 in either MATH 126, MATH 129, or MATH 136; minimum grade of 2.0 in PHYS 121. Offered: SpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 260

A A 299 Undergraduate Research (1-5, max. 10)
Research on special topics under the supervision of a faculty member. Application of fundamentals learned in the classroom to real problems in research. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 299

A A 301 Compressible Aerodynamics (4)
Covers aerodynamics as applied to the problems of performance of flight vehicles in the atmosphere; kinematics and dynamics of flow fields; thin airfoil theory; compressible fluids; one-dimensional compressible flow; and two-dimensional supersonic flow. Prerequisite: either A A 260 or M E 323. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 301

A A 302 Incompressible Aerodynamics (4)
Aerodynamics as applied to the problems of performance of flight vehicles in the atmosphere. Kinematics and dynamics of flow fields; incompressible flow about bodies. Thin airfoil theory; finite wing theory. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in A A 301; PHYS 123; either AMATH 351, MATH 136, or MATH 307. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 302

A A 310 Orbital and Space Flight Mechanics (4)
Newton's law of gravitation. Two-body problem, central force motion, Kepler's laws. Trajectories and conic sections. Position and velocity as functions of time. Orbit determination and coordinate transformations. Rocket dynamics, orbital maneuvers, Hohmann transfer. Interplanetary trajectories, patched conics. Planetary escape and capture. Gravity assist maneuvers. Prerequisite: M E 230. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 310

A A 311 Atmospheric Flight Mechanics (4)
Applied aerodynamics, aircraft flight "envelope," minimum and maximum speeds, climb and glide performance. Range and endurance, take-off and landing performance, using both jet and propeller power plants. Longitudinal and dynamic stability and control, wing downwash, stabilizer and elevator effectiveness, power effects. Lateral and directional stability and control. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 311

A A 312 Structural Vibrations (4)
Vibration theory. Characteristics of single and multi degree-of-freedom linear systems with forced inputs. Approximate methods for determining principal frequencies and mode shapes. Application to simple aeroelastic problems. Prerequisite: M E 230. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 312

A A 320 Aerospace Instrumentation (3)
Hands-on laboratory experience for understanding the design and function of electronic circuits and instrumentation utilized in aerospace engineering. Topics include Ohm's law, Kirchoff's laws, DC and AC circuits, passive and active components, op-amps and comparators, sensors, signal conditioning, electromechanical systems and actuators, digital systems, and data acquistion. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 320

A A 321 Aerospace Laboratory I (3)
The design and conduct of experimental inquiry in the field of aeronautics and astronautics. Laboratory experiments on supersonic flow, structures, vibrations, material properties, and other topics. Theory, calibration, and use of instruments, measurement techniques, analysis of data, report writing. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 321

A A 322 Aerospace Laboratory II (3)
Design and conduct of experimental inquiry in the field of aeronautics and astronautics. Laboratory experiments on subsonic aerodynamics, supersonic flow, structures, propulsion, and other topics. Theory, calibration, and use of instruments, measurement techniques, analysis of data, report writing. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in A A 321. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 322

A A 331 Aerospace Structures I (4)
Analysis and design of aerospace structures. Reviews concepts of stress, strain, and equations of elasticity. Plane stree and plane strain. Application to aerospace structural elements including general bending and torsion of rods and beams, and open and closed thin-walled structures and box beams. Prerequisite: CEE 220. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 331

A A 332 Aerospace Structures II (4)
Shear flow in multi-cell thin walled sections.Bending of rectangular and circular plates. Buckling analysis of beams and plates. Energy principles in elasticity. Introduction to the finite element method. Elements of fracture mechanics and fatigue. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in A A 331. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 332

A A 360 Propulsion (4)
Study of the aero- and thermodynamics of jet and rocket engines. Air-breathing engines as propulsion systems. Turbojets, turbofans, turboprops, ramjets. Aerodynamics of gas-turbine engine components. Rocket vehicle performance. Introduction to space propulsion. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in A A 301. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 360

A A 400 Gas Dynamics (3)
Introduction to kinetic theory and free molecule flow. Review of thermodynamics. One-dimensional gas dynamics: one-dimensional wave motion, combustion waves. Ideal and real gas application. Prerequisite: PHYS 123; either A A 260 or CHEM E 260. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 400

A A 402 Fluid Mechanics (3)
Introduction to fluid mechanics, dimensional analysis, effects of gravity on pressure, kinematics, conservation of mass and momentum, control-volume method, conservation of energy, vorticity and viscosity, viscous effects, Navier-Stokes solutions, and boundary layers. Prerequisite: MATH 324; A A 301. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 402

A A 405 Introduction to Aerospace Plasmas (3)
Development of introductory electromagnetic theory including Lorentz force and Maxwell's equations. Plasma description. Single particle motions and drifts in magnetic and electric fields. Derivation of plasma fluid model. Introduction to plasma waves. Applications to electric propulsion, magnetic confinement, and plasmas in space and Earth's outer atmosphere. Prerequisite: PHYS 123; MATH 324. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 405

A A 410 Aircraft Design I (4-)
Conceptual design of a modern airplane to satisfy a given set of requirements. Estimation of size, selection of configuration, weight and balance, and performance. Satisfaction of stability, control, and handling qualities requirements. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 410

A A 411 Aircraft Design II (-4)
Preliminary design of a modern airplane to satisfy a given set of requirements. Estimation of size, selection of configuration, weight and balance, and performance. Satisfaction of stability, control, and handling qualities requirements. Prerequisite: A A 410. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 411

A A 419 Aerospace Heat Transfer (3)
Fundamentals of conductive, convective, and radiative heat transfer with emphasis on applications to atmospheric and space flight. Prerequisite: PHYS 123; MATH 307. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 419

A A 420 Spacecraft and Space Systems Design I (4-)
Design of space systems and spacecraft for advanced near-Earth and interplanetary missions. Astrodynamics, space environment, space systems engineering. Mission design and analysis, space vehicle propulsion, flight mechanics, atmospheric entry, aerobraking, configuration, structural design, power systems. thermal management, systems integration. Oral presentations and report writing. Design topics vary. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 420

A A 421 Spacecraft and Space System Design II (-4)
A continuation of A A 420. Course content varies from year to year and is dependent on the design topic chosen for A A 420. Prerequisite: A A 420. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 421

A A 430 Finite Element Analysis in Aerospace (3)
Introduction to the finite element method and application. One-, two-, and three-dimensional problems including trusses, beams, box beams, plane stress and plane strain analysis, and heat transfer. Use of finite element software. Prerequisite: CEE 220. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 430

A A 432 Composite Materials for Aerospace Structures (3)
Introduction to analysis and design of aerospace structures utilizing filamentary composite materials. Basic elastic properties and constitutive relations of composite laminates. Failure criteria, buckling analysis, durability, and damage tolerance of composite structures. Aerospace structure design philosophy and practices. Prerequisite: A A 332. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 432

A A 440 Flight Mechanics I (3)
Calculation of aerodynamic characteristics of aircraft and components including stability derivatives. Relation to wind tunnel and flight data. Vehicle equations of motion within the atmosphere, characteristics of propulsion systems and components including propellers. Prediction of performance, stability, and control characteristics for a specific aircraft. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 440

A A 441 Flight Test Engineering (3)
Determination in flight of performance, stability, and control characteristics of aircraft; and comparison with predicted and wind tunnel results. Prerequisite: A A 311; A A 440. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 441

A A 447 Control in Aerospace Systems (4)
Overview of feedback control. Dynamic models for control systems design including ODE, transfer function, and state-space. Linearization of nonlinear models. Analysis of stability, controllability, observability, time/frequency domain techniques. Frequency of response design techniques. Design of control systems via case studies. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 1.7 in A A 312; M E 230; MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 447

A A 448 Control Systems Sensors and Actuators (3)
Overview of feedback control. Study of control systems components and formulation of their mathematical models. Discussion and analysis of amplifiers, DC servomotors, magnetic-actuators, accelerometers, potentiometers, shaft encoders and resolvers, proximity sensors, and force transducers.Experimental determination of component models and model parameters. Two three-hour laboratories per week. Prerequisite: A A 447.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 448

A A 449 Special Topics in Controls (3-5)
Topics of current interest in controls. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 449

A A 461 Advanced Air Breathing Propulsion (3)
Examines gas turbine engine design methodology. Covers aerodynamics or gas dynamics of air breathing engine components: inlets, compressors, turbines, and nozzles. Studies the on-design and off-design performance of gas turbine engines. Includes combustion, emissions, noise, and advanced air breathing propulsion systems. Prerequisite: A A 360. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 461

A A 462 Rocket Propulsion (3)
Covers the physical and performance characteristics of chemical rocket propulsion systems. Includes combustion chamber thermochemistry, propellant properties and handling, and rocket system component interactions. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 462

A A 470 Systems Engineering (4)
Concepts of system approach, system hierarchies, functional analysis, requirements, trade studies, and other concepts used to define and integrate complex engineering systems. Introduction to risk analysis and reliability, failure modes and effects analysis, writing specifications, and lean manufacturing. Offered: jointly with IND E 470.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 470

A A 480 Systems Dynamics (3)
Equations of motion and solutions for selected dynamic problems; natural frequencies and mode shapes; response of simple systems to applied loads. Prerequisite: A A 312. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 480

A A 496 Undergraduate Seminar (1, max. 4)
Lectures and discussions on topics of current interest in aviation and space technology by guest speakers. Topics vary. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 496

A A 498 Special Topics (1-5, max. 15)
Topics of current interest in the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 498

A A 499 Undergraduate Research (1-5, max. 10)
Research on special topics under the supervision of a faculty member. Application of fundamentals learned in the classroom to real problems in research. A maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward senior technical electives. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 499

A A 501 Physical Gasdynamics I (3)
Equilibrium kinetic theory; chemical thermodynamics; thermodynamic properties derived from quantum statistical mechanics; reacting gas mixtures; applications to real gas flows and gas dynamics. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 501

A A 503 Continuum Mechanics (3)
Reviews concepts of motion, stress, energy for a general continuum; conservation of mass, momentum, and energy; and the second law; constitutive equations for linear/nonlinear elastic, viscous/inviscid fluids, and general materials; and examples/solutions for solid/fluid materials. Offered: jointly with M E 503; A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 503

A A 504 Compressible Fluid Mechanics (3)
Reviews the fundamentals with application to external and internal flows; supersonic flow, 1D and Quasi-1D, steady and unsteady flow, oblique shocks and expansion waves, linearized flow, 2D flow, method of characteristics; and transonic and hypersonic flow. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 504

A A 506 Vortex-Dominated Flows (3)
Examines the vorticity equation, baroclinic torque, solenoidality, Biot-Savart's formula, diffusion of vorticity, Burger vortex, system of vortices, Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, effects of density, shear, and surface tension on instability, swirling flows, and other special topics. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 506

A A 507 Fluid Mechanics (3)
Covers inviscid and viscous imcompressible flows, exact solutions of laminar flows, creeping flows, boundary layers, free-shear flows, vorticity equation, and introduction to vortex dynamics. Offered: jointly with M E 507; W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 507

A A 508 Turbulence (3)
The phenomena of turbulence; transition prediction; Reynolds stresses; turbulent boundary-layer equations. Approximate methods for turbulent boundary layers. Prerequisite: A A/M E 507 or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 508

A A 510 Mathematical Foundations of Systems Theory (4)
Mathematical foundations for system theory presented from an engineering viewpoint. Includes set theory; functions, inverse functions; metric spaces; finite dimensional linear spaces; linear operators on finite dimensional spaces; projections on Hilbert spaces. Applications to engineering systems stressed. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 510/E E 510/M E 510.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 510

A A 513 Gas Laser Theory and Practice (3)
Physics and fluid mechanics of gas lasers, with emphasis on performance of gas dynamic lasers, flowing chemical lasers, and gaseous electric lasers. Development of laser optics, interaction of radiation and matter, laser oscillation conditions, and methods of obtaining population inversions. Applications of high-power lasers emphasized. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 513

A A 516 Stability and Control of Flight Vehicles (3)
Static and dynamic stability and control of flight vehicles in the atmosphere. Determination of stability derivatives. Effects of stability derivatives on flight characteristics. Flight dynamic model. Responses to control inputs and external disturbances. Handling qualities. Control system components, sensor characteristics. Stability augmentation systems. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 516

A A 518 Automatic Control of Flight Vehicles (3)
Specifications of flight vehicle performance. Synthesis of stability augmentation systems and autopilot control laws in the frequency-domain and using multivariable control methods. Reduced-order controller synthesis, digital design, and implementation. Use of computer-aided control design packages. Prerequisite: A A 516 and A A 548. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 518

A A 523 Special Topics in Fluid Physics (3)
Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 523

A A 524 Aeroacoustics (3)
Reviews the fundamental concepts of acoustics which include sound measurements, reflection, resonance, transmission, radiation, scattering, diffraction, ray acoustics, wave guide, turbo-machinery noise, sound suppression, jet noise, and airframe noise and acoustic problems in rockets and other propulsion systems. Offered: A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 524

A A 525 Special Topics in Advanced Airbreathing Engines (3)
Reviews the fundamental concepts of advanced airbreathing engines including advanced gas turbines, ramjets, scramjets and variants, detonations engines, flow with chemical energy release, shock dynamics, Chapman-Jouguet, ZND model, and multi-cellular and spinning detonation. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 525

A A 527 Space Power Systems (3)
Explores the theoretical background and technology of power systems for satellites, space science missions, and planetary and lunar outposts. Focuses on photovoltaic, solar-thermal, and nuclear systems, as well as chemical systems for storage. Addresses thermal management. Offered: A, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 527

A A 528 Spacecraft Dynamics and Control (3)
Examines spacecraft dynamics and control. Includes basic orbital mechanics - the restricted three body problem, Hill's theory, perturbation theory, orbit determination, rigid body kinematics and dynamics, attitude control, and spacecraft formation flying. Prerequisite: MATH 307; MATH 308. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 528

A A 529 Space Propulsion (3)
Nucleonics, and heat transfer of nuclear-heated rockets. Electrothermal, electromagnetic, and electrostatic thrusters. Power/propulsion systems. Prerequisite: permission. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 529

A A 530 Mechanics of Solids (3)
General concepts and theory of solid mechanics. Large deformations. Behavior of elastic, viscoelastic, and plastic solids. Linear theory of elasticity and thermoelasticity. Wave propagation in solids. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 530

A A 531 Integrity of Metallic Aircraft Structures (3)
Examines the theory of failure for metallic structures; fatigue properties, fatigue load spectrum, fatigue crack propagation, fracture mechanics, damage tolerance, fretting and corrosion fatigue, design applications, and case studies. Prerequisite: A A 530 or equivalent or permission of instructor. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 531

A A 532 Mechanics of Composite Materials (3)
Analysis and design of composite materials for aerospace structures. Micromechanics. Anisotropic elasticity. Laminated plate theory. Thermo-viscoelastic behavior and fracture of composites. Prerequisite: coursework in mechanics of matierals or permission of instructor. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 532

A A 533 Materials and Processing Technology of Aerospace Composites (3)
Covers the fundamentals of composite materials manufacturing and processing, emphasizing modern aviation industry practices. Focuses on autoclave and out-of-the-autoclave processing of carbon fiber composites, mechanical and physical property testing, generation of material allowables, and material qualification for composites. Emphasizes aircraft structures, but is applicable to all high performance, lightweight structures. Recommended: A A 532, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 533

A A 534 Integrity of Composite Aircraft Structures (3)
Concepts of certification by analysis supported by test evidence in aircraft structures, emphasizing regulatory agency requirements and industry approaches. Subjects include allowables approach, bolted and bonded joints, damage resistance and tolerance, specialized test methods, and inspection techniques. Prerequisite: either A A 432 or A A 532; recommended: A A 533. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 534

A A 535 Advanced Composite Structural Analysis (3)
Covers advanced stress analysis methods for composite structures made of beams, laminates, sandwich plates, and thin shells; stress and buckling analyses of solid and thin-walled composite beams; shear deformable theory for bending of thick laminated plates; and stress and fracture mechanics analysis of bonded joints. Prerequisite: A A 532. Offered: jointly with M E 500; Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 535

A A 538 Introduction to Structural Optimization (3)
Includes the formulation of engineering design problems as optimization problems, gradient based numerical optimization methods, design oriented structural analysis, structural sensitivity analysis, approximation concepts, and introduction to multidisciplinary design optimization. Prerequisite: coursework in structural analysis; finite elements; and computer programming; or permission of instructor. Offered: A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 538

A A 540 Finite Element Analysis I (3)
Formulation of the finite element method using variational and weighted residual methods. Element types and interpolation functions. Application to elasticity problems, thermal conduction, and other problems of engineering and physics. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 540

A A 541 Finite Element Analysis II (3)
Advanced concepts of the finite element method. Hybrid and boundary element methods. Nonlinear, eigenvalue, and time-dependent problems. Prerequisite: A A 540 or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 541

A A 543 Computational Fluid Dynamics (3)
Examines numerical discretization of the inviscid compressible equations of fluid dynamics; finite-difference and finite-volume methods; time integration, iterative methods, and explicit and implicit algorithms; consistency, stability, error analysis, and properties of numerical schemes, grid generation; and applications to the numerical solution of model equations and the 2D Euler equations. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 543

A A 544 Turbulence Modeling and Simulation (3)
Examines numerical discretization of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation; projection method, introduction to turbulence; Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes equations; algebraic, one-equation, and two-equation turbulence models; large-eddy simulation; direct numerical simulation; and applications to the numerical solution of laminar and turbulent flows in simple geometries. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 544

A A 545 Computational Methods for Plasmas (3)
Develops the governing equations for plasma models - particle, kinetics, and MHD. Applies the governing equation to plasma dynamics through the PIC method and integration of fluid evaluation equations. Examines numerical solution to equilibrium configurations, and linear stability by energy principle and variational method. Prerequisite: A A 405 or A A 557. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 545

A A 546 Advanced Topics in Control System Theory (3)
Topics of current interest for advanced graduate students with adequate preparation in linear and nonlinear system theory. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 546

A A 547 Linear Systems Theory (4)
Linearity, linearization, finite dimensionality, time-varying vs. time-invariant linear systems, interconnection of linear systems, functional/structural descriptions of linear systems, system zeros and invertibility, linear system stability, system norms, state transition, matrix exponentials, controllability and observability, realization theory. Recommended: either A A 447, E E 447, or M E 471. Offered: jointly with E E 547/M E 547.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 547

A A 548 Linear Multivariable Control (3)
Introduction to MIMO systems, successive single loop design comparison, Lyapunov stability theorem, full state feedback controller design, observer design, LQR problem statement, design, stability analysis, and tracking design. LQG design, separation principle, stability robustness. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 548/M E 548.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 548

A A 549 Estimation and System Identification (3)
Fundamentals of state estimation for linear and nonlinear systems. Discrete and continuous systems. Probability and stochastic systems theory. Models with noise. Kalman-Bucy filters, extended Kalman filters, recursive estimation. Numerical issues in filter design and implementation. Prerequisite: either A A 547, E E 547, or M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 549/M E 549.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 549

A A 550 Nonlinear Optimal Control (3)
Calculus of variations for dynamical systems, definition of the dynamic optimization problem, constraints and Lagrange multipliers, the Pontryagin Maximum Principle, necessary conditions for optimality, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation, singular arc problems, computational techniques for solution of the necessary conditions. Recommended: A A 548/E E 548. Offered: jointly with E E 550/M E 550.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 550

A A 553 Vibrations of Aerospace Systems (3)
Continuous and discrete systems, natural frequencies, and modal analysis; forced vibrations and motion-dependent forces. Structural damping; control augmented structures. Measurements for structural dynamic testing. Prerequisite: A A 571 or equivalent. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 553

A A 554 Aeroelasticity (3)
Static and dynamic aeroelasticity, unsteady aerodynamics, aeroservoelastic modeling, and active control. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 554

A A 556 Space and Laboratory Plasma Physics (3)
Discussion of waves, equilibrium and stability, diffusion and resistivity, basic plasma kinetic theory, and wave-particle interactions. Prerequisite: ESS 415, or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ESS 576; W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 556

A A 557 Physics of Fusion Plasmas (3)
Review and comparison of single particle and fluid descriptions of plasmas. MDH equilibrium, flux surfaces, and basic toroidal description. Collisional processes including physical and velocity space diffusion. Introduction to island formation, stochasticity, and various plasma instabilities. Prerequisite: A A 405 or GPHYS 505. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 557

A A 558 Plasma Theory (3)
Equilibrium, stability, and confinement. Classical transport, collisionless and resistive skin depths. Ideal MHD equations formally derived and properties of plasmas in the ideal limit are studied. Straight and toroidal equilibrium. Linear stability analysis with examples. Taylor minimum energy principle. Prerequisite: either A A 405, A A 556, A A 557, ESS 576, or GPHYS 537. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 558

A A 559 Plasma Science Seminar (1, max. 30)
Current topics in plasma science and controlled fusion with presentations by invited speakers, on-campus speakers, and students. Students expected to give a seminar once or twice a year with instructor reviewing the method of presentation and material used for the presentation. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 559

A A 560 Plasma Diagnostics (3)
Discusses plasma measurement methods including material probes and optical methods. Covers techniques for making measurement in a high electrical noise environment. Presents methods for measuring electron and ion temperatures, density, impurities, magnetic fields, fluctuations, and neutrals. Prerequisite: A A 405 or equivalent. Offered: A, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 560

A A 564 Kinetic Theory/Radiative Transfer (3)
Boltzmann and Collisionless Boltzmann (Vlasov) equations. Instabilities in homogeneous and inhomogeneous plasma, quasi-linear diffusion, wave-particle interaction, collisional (Fokker-Plank) equation. Introduction to radiative non-equilibrium, scattering and absorption processes. Integral equation of radiative transfer. Prerequisite: A A 501 or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 564

A A 565 Fusion Reactor Fundamentals (3)
Introduction to basic engineering features of fusion power plants. Brief description of basic fusion physics and discussion of power plants for leading thermonuclear concepts. Engineering problems; blanket, shield neutronics; materials, thermal hydraulics; tritium, superconducting systems. Prerequisite: completion of or concurrent enrollment in A A 405 or permission of instructor. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 565

A A 570 Manifolds and Geometry for Systems and Control (3)
Introduction to fundamentals of calculus on manifolds and group theory with applications in robotics and control theory. Topics include: manifolds, tangent spaces and bundles, Lie groups and algebras, coordinate vs. coordinate-free representations. Applications from physics, robotics, and control theory. Offered: jointly with E E 570/M E 570; W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 570

A A 571 Principles of Dynamics I (3)
Systems of particles, rotating axes, rigid-body dynamics; calculus of variations. Lagrangian mechanics. Hamilton's principle. Kane's equations. Periodic and quasiperiodic motion. Stability of dynamical systems. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 571

A A 578 Optimization in System Sciences (3)
Covers convex sets, separation theorems, theorem of alternatives and their applications, convex analysis, convex functions, conjugation, subgradients, convex optimization, duality and applications, linear and semi-definite programming. Linear matrix inequalities, optimization algorithms, applications in system theory and control, bilinear, rank minimization, optimization software. Recommended: A A 547/M E 547/E E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 578/M E 578; W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 578

A A 580 Geometric Methods for Non-Linear Control Systems (3)
Analysis and design of nonlinear control systems focusing on differential geometric methods. Topics include controllability, observability, feedback linearization, invariant distributions, and local coordinate transformations. Emphasis on systems evolving on Lie groups and linearly uncontrollable systems Prerequisite: A A 570/E E 570/M E 570. Offered: jointly with E E 580/M E 580; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 580

A A 581 Digital Control (3) Chizeck
Sampled-data systems, and z-transform. Frequency domain properties. Sampling D/A and A/D conversion. Controller design via discrete-time equivalents, direct methods, state feedback and observers. Quantization effects. LQR control and introduction to LQG optimal control. Prerequisite: E E 548/A A 548/ M E 548. Offered: jointly with E E 581/M E 581; W.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 581

A A 582 Introduction to Discrete Event Systems (3) Berg
Modeling DES with automata and Petri nets. Languages. State estimation and diagnostics. Control specifications. Feedback control. Dealing with uncontrollability and unobservability. Dealing with blocking. Timed automata and Petri nets. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/ M E 471. Offered: jointly with E E 582/M E 582; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 582

A A 583 Nonlinear Control Systems (3)
Analysis of nonlinear systems and nonlinear control system design. Phase plane analysis. Lyapunov stability analysis. Describing functions. Feedback linearization. Introduction to variable structure control. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/M E 471. Offered: jointly with E E 583/M E 583.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 583

A A 585 System Identification and Adaptive Control (3)
Theory and methods of system identification and adaptive control. Identification of linear-in-parameter systems, using recursive LS and extended LS methods; model order selection. Indirect and direct adaptive control. Controller synthesis, transient and stability properties. Recommended: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 585/M E 585.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 585

A A 589 Special Topics in Solid Mechanics (4)
Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 589

A A 591 Robotics and Control Systems Colloquium (1, max. 30)
Colloquium on current topics in robotics and control systems analysis and design. Topics presented by invited speakers as well as on-campus speakers. Emphasis on the cross-disciplinary nature of robotics and control systems. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 591/E E 591/M E 591.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 591

A A 593 Feedforward Control (3) Devasia
Design feedforward controllers for precision output tracking; inversion-based control of non-minimum-phase systems; effect of plant uncertainty on feedforward control; design of feedforward controllers for applications such as vertical take off and landing aircraft, flexible structures and piezo-actuators. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 593/M E 593; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 593

A A 594 Robust Control (3)
Basic foundations of linear analysis and control theory, model realization and reduction, balanced realization and truncation, stabilization problem, coprime factorizations, Youla parameterization, matrix inequalities, H-infinity and H2 control, KYP lemma, uncertain systems, robust H2, integral quadratic constraints, linear parameter varying synthesis, applications of robust control. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 594/M E 594; Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 594

A A 595 Global Integrated Systems Engineering ([4/6]-, max. 10)
Covers systems engineering, project management, finance, economics, and a seminar on global technical topics. Offered: jointly with IND E 595; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 595

A A 596 Global Integrated Systems Engineering Project (3) Mastrangelo
Project-based systems design course. Prerequisite: A A/INDE 595. Offered: jointly with IND E 596; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 596

A A 597 Networked Dynamics Systems (3)
Provides an overview of graph-theoretic techniques that are instrumental for studying dynamic systems that coordinate their states over a signal-exchange network. Topics include network models, network properties, dynamics over networks, formation control, biological networks, observability, controllability, and performance measures over networks. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with E E 597/M E 597.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 597

A A 598 Special Topics in Aeronautics and Astronautics (1-5, max. 30)
Introduction of special topics in the field of aeronautics and astronautics. Topics introduced by regular and guest speakers and includes a variety of information that is of current interest in aeronautics and astronautics. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 598

A A 599 Special Projects (1-5, max. 30)
Investigation on a special project by the student under the supervision of a faculty member. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 599

A A 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 600

A A 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 700

A A 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: A A 800

A E 501 Analytical Methods for Aerospace Engineering (4)
Applications of analytical and mathematical methods for aerospace engineering, including: ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, linear algebra, vector calculus, integral theorems, complex analysis, optimization, and probability. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 501

A E 510 Linear Systems Theory (4)
Covers theoretic methods for state-space linear systems including linearization of nonlinear systems, time-varying and time-invariant linear systems, discrete time and continuous time representations, canonical state space representations, linear system stability, time evolution of systems, controllability, and observability. Prerequisite: A E 501. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 510

A E 511 Classical Control Theory (4)
Covers theoretic methods for linear systems in the frequency domain including nonlinear and linear systems; linearization of nonlinear systems; stability, controllability, and observability of linear systems; linear system representations in frequency and time domains; dynamic system response in time and frequency domain; and frequency domain control design. Prerequisite: A E 501. Offered: A, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 511

A E 512 Dynamics, Stability, and Control of Vehicles (4)
Covers stability derivatives; effects of stability derivatives on flight characteristics; dynamics of rigid bodies in air, space and underwater applications; responses to control inputs and external disturbances; handing qualities; control system components; sensor characteristics; stability augmentation systems; guidance and navigation; human factors; effects of limited communication; and multivehicle systems. Prerequisite: A E 501. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 512

A E 519 Special Topics in Aerospace Engineering: Controls (4, max. 8)
Current research and advanced special topics in the area of aerospace engineering - controls. Prerequisite: A E 501.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 519

A E 520 Fundamentlas of Fluid Dynamics (4)
Flow kinematics and dynamics, inviscid and viscous flows, incompressible and compressible flows, shock-waves, boundary layers, vorticity, and turbulence. Prerequisite: A E 501. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 520

A E 523 Aircraft Noise (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 523

A E 529 Special Topics in Aerospace Engineering: Fluids (4, max. 8)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 529

A E 532 Rocket Propulsion (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 532

A E 539 Special Topics in Aerospace Engineering: Propulsion, Plasma, and Power (4, max. 8)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 539

A E 540 Mechanics of Solids (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 540

A E 541 Finite Element Analysis (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 541

A E 542 Fatigue and Fracture in Aerospace Structures (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 542

A E 549 Special Topics in Aerospace Engineering: Structures (4, max. 8)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 549

A E 550 Mechanics of Composite Materials (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 550

A E 553 Advanced Composite Structural Analysis (4)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 553

A E 559 Special Topics in Aerospace Engineering: Composites (4, max. 8)
View course details in MyPlan: A E 559

A E 598 Aerospace Engineering Colloquium (1, max. 30)
Covers the latest research in aerospace engineering. Includes current trends in professional aerospace engineering (e.g., manufacturing, systems, etc.) and professional development for aerospace engineers (e.g., project management, job searches, etc.). Lectures and discussions led by guest speakers. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: A E 598

CHEM E 299 Undergraduate Research (1-3, max. 9)
Research or special topics under the supervision of a faculty member. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 299

CHEM E 301 Leadership Seminar (1) Schwartz
Forum for industrial, academic, and government leaders to share their experiences and insights with students. Includes topics related to leadership in the chemical engineering profession including career planning, management skills, interpersonal skills, effective planning, entrepreneurship, ethics, and strategic decisions. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 301

CHEM E 309 Creativity and Innovation (2) VLPA G. ALLAN
Understanding creativity and creative thinking; its challenges and dynamics through knowledge, judgment, planning, and observation. Techniques of creative thinking. Design and development of creative games. Computer-aided creative thinking. Creation, protection, and exploitation of a useful idea, including bargaining and negotiations. Offered: jointly with BSE 309; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 309

CHEM E 310 Material and Energy Balances (4)
Chemical and physical process calculations: steady- and unsteady-state material and energy balances with specific examples in vapor-liquid contact operations and multiphase extraction, and introductory thermochemistry. Prerequisite: PHYS 122 and MATH 307. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 310

CHEM E 325 Energy and Entropy (4)
Introduction to the basic principles of thermodynamics from both microscopic and macroscopic points of view. Emphasis on equilibrium phenomena, and the trade-off of energy and disorder in determining structure and properties. Applications of thermodynamics in process design and analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM E 310. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 325

CHEM E 326 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4)
Phase equilibria and chemical equilibria in multicomponent systems; theories of solution; chemical reaction analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM E 325. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 326

CHEM E 330 Transport Processes I (5)
Diffusive transport of momentum, heat, and mass; general aspects of fluid flow; the Navier-Stokes equations; one-dimensional flow with engineering applications. Prerequisite: CHEM E 310; either MATH 136 or MATH 307. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 330

CHEM E 340 Transport Processes II (4)
Heat transfer, basic principles, and applications. Conduction, convection, and radiation. Prerequisite: CHEM E 330. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 340

CHEM E 341 Energy and Environment (3) NW
Energy use. Fossil energy conversion. Oil, gas, coal resources. Air impacts. Nuclear energy principles, reactors, fuel cycle. Prerequisite: either MATH 112, MATH 124, or Q SCI 291; either CHEM 120, CHEM 142, CHEM 144, PHYS 114, or PHYS 121. Offered: jointly with ENVIR 341/M E 341; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 341

CHEM E 355 Biological Frameworks for Engineers (3) Shen
For engineers with no prior experience in the biological sciences. Hands-on, project-based course covers fundamental concepts and language of biology, from an engineering perspective. Topics include functions of life, information processing, proteins, DNA, genetic variability, control loops, energetics, tissues, organisms, ecosystems. Prerequisite: either CHEM 142 or CHEM 145; PHYS 123; either MATH 307 or AMATH 351; recommended: CHEM 220. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 355

CHEM E 375 Chemical Enginering Computer Skills (2) Pfaendtner
Use Excell, Matlab, and AspenPlus to solve typical chemical engineering problems. Solve realistic problems and explore alternatives that would be inaccessible for hand calculations. Includes equations of state, chemical equilibrium of simultaneous reactions, phase equilibria, plug flow reactors, heat transfer in 1-D, and time-dependent heat transfer. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 375

CHEM E 435 Transport Processes III (4)
Mass transfer, basic principles, and applications to equipment design. Physical separation processes. Prerequisite: CHEM E 326; CHEM E 340. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 435

CHEM E 436 Chemical Engineering Laboratory I (3)
Lectures on statistics, experimental design, instrumentation, laboratory safety, and report writing; laboratory experiments on fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Emphasis on teaming, experimental planning, procedures, report writing, and oral presentations. Prerequisite: CHEM E 326; CHEM E 340 which may be taken concurrently; HCDE 231. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 436

CHEM E 437 Chemical Engineering Laboratory II (3)
Continuation of CHEM E 436. Laboratory investigation of chemical engineering principles applied to equipment design with emphasis on mass transfer operations and chemical reactors. Prerequisite: CHEM E 435; CHEM E 436; CHEM E 465. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 437

CHEM E 442 Renewable Energy (4) NW P. MALTE
Introduction to renewable energy. Principles and practices: solar, wind, water, and biomass energy conversion. Prerequisite: either M E 323, CHEM E 325, A A 260, or E E 351. Offered: jointly with M E 442; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 442

CHEM E 445 Fuel Cell Engineering (3) Stuve
Introduction to electrochemical fuel cells for use in transportation and stationary power applications. Topics covered include types of fuel cells, single cell operation, stack engineering, overall system design, and safety, with emphasis on proton exchange membrane and solid oxide fuel cells. Prerequisite: CHEM E 330.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 445

CHEM E 455 Surface and Colloid Science Laboratory (3) Berg, Pozzo
Laboratory techniques, equipment, and underlying fundamentals in surface and colloid science. Experiments in the measurement of surface tension, adsorption, wetting and spreading, colloid properties, emulsion preparation and stability, electrophoresis, and interfacial hydrodynamics. Recommended: CHEM E 326; CHEM E 330. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 455

CHEM E 457 Principles of Molecular Engineering (3) Hillhouse
Covers the basic aspects of statistical mechanics, focusing primarily on the canonical ensemble. Develops and applies a set of tools to regular liquid solutions, phase formation, spinodal decomposition, adsorption, polymer thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, and physical kinetics. Prerequisite: CHEM E 310; CHEM E 325; CHEM 455. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 457

CHEM E 458 Surface Analysis (3) B. RATNER
Understanding of solid surfaces for research and development in microelectronics, catalysis, adhesion, biomaterials, science wear, and corrosion science. Newer methods available to study surfaces of materials. Electron emission spectroscopies (ESCA, Auger): ion scattering, ion spectroscopic, photon spectroscopic, and thermodynamic methods. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 492; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 458

CHEM E 461 Electrochemical Engineering (3) Schwartz
Explores role of thermodynamics, charge transfer kinetics, and mass transfer on behavior of electrochemical systems. Includes cell thermodynamics, faradaic and non-faradaic rate processes, ionic transport, nucleation and growth theories. Applications to chemical sensors, batteries, corrosion, thin film deposition. In-class demonstrations to illustrate concepts.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 461

CHEM E 465 Reactor Design (4)
Application of chemical kinetics and transport phenomena to the design of chemical reactors; characterization of batch and continuous-flow reactors in homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. Prerequisite: CHEM E 326; CHEM E 340. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 465

CHEM E 467 Biochemical Engineering (3) F. BANEYX
Application of basic chemical engineering principles to biochemical and biological process industries such as fermentation, enzyme technology, and biological waste treatment. Rapid overview of relevant microbiology, biochemistry, and molecular genetics. Design and analysis of biological reactors and product recovery operations. Prerequisite: CHEM E 340; either CHEM 223, CHEM 237, or CHEM 335; recommended: CHEM E 465. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 467; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 467

CHEM E 468 Air-Pollution Control Equipment Design (3)
Designs to control air pollutants from stationary sources. Procedures for calculating design and operating parameters. Fundamental mechanisms and processes of gaseous and particulate control equipment for absorption and adsorption of gaseous pollutants; electrostatic precipitation and filtration of particulate pollutants. Actual case studies. Offered: jointly with CEE 494/M E 468.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 468

CHEM E 480 Process Dynamics and Control (4)
Dynamics of process units and systems; instrumentation and control system design and analysis. Includes weekly laboratory. Prerequisite: CHEM E 435; CHEM E 465. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 480

CHEM E 481 Process Optimization (3) Holt
Concepts and techniques of optimizing chemical engineering processes and systems, including classical and direct methods of search, linear and nonlinear programming, dynamic programming, statistical experimental design, and evolutionary operation. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 481

CHEM E 482 Advanced Topics in Process Control (3) Holt, Ricker
Current topics in process control design and analysis. Possible topics include robustness analysis and design, time delay compensation, modern frequency response techniques, discrete control, adaptive control, model-based control, and nonlinear control. Prerequisite: CHEM E 480.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 482

CHEM E 484 Electronic and Optoelectronic Polymers (3) Jenekhe
Covers the chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering applications of semiconducting and metallic conjugated polymers. Examines the structural origins of the diverse electronic and optoelectronic properties of conjugated polymers. Exemplifies applications by light-emitting diodes, lasers, solar cells, thin film transistors, electrochromic devices, biosensors, and batteries. Prerequisite: either CHEM 237, CHEM 455, CHEM E 340, or MSE 310. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 484

CHEM E 485 Process Design I (4)
Applied economics in chemical engineering design and operations; measures of profitability; capital and operating cost estimates; introduction to design and design strategies. Prerequisite: CHEM E 480 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 485

CHEM E 486 Process Design II (5)
Comprehensive design of a specific process or product, including economic feasibility studies, utilization of market survey and plant location studies, process equipment design and optimization, and overall plant integration and layout. Prerequisite: CHEM E 485. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 486

CHEM E 490 Engineering Materials for Biomedical Applications (3)
Combined application of principles of physical chemistry and biochemistry, materials engineering, to biomedical problems and products. Applications include implants and medical devices, drug delivery systems, cell culture processes, diagnostics, and bioseparations. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 490; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 490

CHEM E 491 Controlled-Release Systems (3) S. PUN
Mechanisms for controlled release of active agents and the development of useful drug delivery systems for this purpose. Release mechanisms considered include diffusive, convective, and erosive driving forces. Delivery routes include topical, oral, and in vivo. Some special case studies covered in detail. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 491; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 491

CHEM E 493 Advanced Surface Analysis (3) D. CASTNER
Covers the latest advanced in surface analysis instrumentation and methodology, including advanced methods of biorecognition AFM, surface Plasmon resonance, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, sum frequency generation spectroscopy, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry, and multivariate analysis. Prerequisite: either CHEM E 458 or BIOEN 492. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 493; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 493

CHEM E 497 Special Projects in Chemical Engineering Design ([1-6]-, max. 12)
Chemical engineering design instruction and experience in special projects, such as industrially motivated, timely, or interdisciplinary projects. Project subject and content varies. Majors only. Prerequisite: CHEM E 340.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 497

CHEM E 498 Special Topics in Chemical Engineering (1-4, max. 12)
Topics of current interest in the field. Subject matter changes from quarter to quarter.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 498

CHEM E 499 Undergraduate Research ([1-6]-, max. 12)
Independent research projects in chemical engineering. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 499

CHEM E 510 Mathematical Foundations of Systems Theory (4)
Mathematical foundations for system theory presented from an engineering viewpoint. Includes set theory; functions, inverse functions; metric spaces; finite dimensional linear spaces; linear operators on finite dimensional spaces; projections on Hilbert spaces. Applications to engineering systems stressed. Offered: jointly with A A 510/E E 510/M E 510.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 510

CHEM E 511 Biomaterials Seminar (1, max. 18) D. CASTNER, L. GAMBLE
Presentation of student research results. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 511.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 511

CHEM E 512 Methods of Engineering Analysis (3)
Applications of mathematics to problems in chemical engineering; vector calculus; properties and methods of solution of first and second order partial differential equations; similarity transforms, separation of variables, Laplace and Fourier transforms. Prerequisite: MATH 308, MATH 307 or AMATH 351, MATH 324, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with AMATH 512; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 512

CHEM E 515 Experimental Methods in Chemical Engineering Research (3) Baneyx, Berg, Jiang
Lecture and laboratory studies in current research methods of chemical engineering. Includes surface science, biochemical engineering, collodial chemistry, light scattering, and nanoscience techniques. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 515

CHEM E 523 Seminar in Chemical Engineering (0-1, max. 30)
Topics of current interest in chemical engineering. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 523

CHEM E 525 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4)
Review of principles of thermodynamics. Applications to problems in multiphase and multicomponent systems; theories of solutions. Prerequisite: undergraduate thermodynamics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 525

CHEM E 530 Momentum, Heat, and Mass Transfer I (4)
Derivation of the differential equations for mass, energy, and momentum transport. Principles of fluid mechanics; creeping flow, turbulence, boundary-layer theory. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 530

CHEM E 531 Momentum, Heat, and Mass Transfer II (3)
Continuation of CHEM E 530. Flows of fluid-particle systems; convective heat transfer, natural convection. Prerequisite: CHEM E 530.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 531

CHEM E 554 Nanoscale Science I: Contact Mechanics and Rheology on the Nanoscale (3) Overney
Introductory nanoscale science with emphasis on contact mechanics, principle and concept of forces, scanning force microscopy, tribology (friction, wear, lubrication), rheology, ultrathin organic films, physical properties of polymers, and computer simulation. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 554

CHEM E 556 Colloidal Systems (3) Berg, Pozzo
Examines the unique properties and application of colloidal materials, i.e., dispersions of micro- or nano-sized particles in various media are described. Explores their inherent instability, and their kinetic, phoretic, electric, optical, and rheological properties. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 556

CHEM E 558 Surface Analysis (3) B. RATNER
Understanding of solid surfaces for research and development in microelectronics, catalysis, adhesion, biomaterials science, wear and corrosion science. Newer methods available to study surfaces of materials. Electron emission spectroscopies (ESCA, Auger); ion scattering, ion spectroscopic, photon spectroscopic, and thermodynamic methods. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 592.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 558

CHEM E 560 Reactions at Solid Surfaces (3) Stuve
Fundamental studies of adsorption and reactions on metallic and non-metallic surfaces with emphasis on heterogeneous catalysis and electrochemistry, including fuel cells. Topics include gas phase and liquid phase surface reactions, analyzed both experimentally and computationally. Prerequisite: undergraduate level course in kinetics or catalysis.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 560

CHEM E 565 Kinetics and Catalysis (3) Stuve
Homogeneous and heterogeneous systems with emphasis on chemical engineering principles applied to industrial reactor design. Prerequisite: CHEM E 525.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 565

CHEM E 580 Topics in Chemical Engineering Design (3, max. 9)
Lectures and seminars on current design methods in chemical engineering, including technical and economic feasibility of processes, design and optimization of process equipment, and environmental and social constraints. Prerequisite: undergraduate chemical engineering design, admission to chemical engineering master's program, or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 580

CHEM E 584 Electronic and Optoelectronic Polymers (3) Jenekhe
Covers the chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering applications of semiconducting and metallic conjugated polymers. Examines the structural origins of the diverse electronic and optoelectronic properties of conjugated polymers. Exemplifies applications by light-emitting diodes, lasers, solar cells, thin film transistors, electrochromic devices, biosensors, and batteries. Prerequisite: either CHEM 237, CHEM 455, CHEM E 340, or MSE 310. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 584

CHEM E 588 Research in Applied Microbiology (1, max. 30) Lidstrom
Weekly research seminar and discussion of scientific literature pertaining to applied microbiology. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with MICROM 588; AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 588

CHEM E 590 Advanced Topics in Biomaterials (3)
Major, controversial issues in application of synthetic materials to medical problems. Blood compatibility, bioadhesion, intraocular lenses, contact lenses, polyurethanes, biodegradation, protein adsorption, corrosion, bone fixation, new materials, artificial heart, medical device regulation. Prerequisite: BIOEN 490 or CHEM E 490. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 590.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 590

CHEM E 591 Robotics and Control Systems Colloquium (1, max. 30)
Colloquium on current topics in robotics and control systems analysis and design. Topics presented by invited speakers as well as on-campus speakers. Emphasis on the cross-disciplinary nature of robotics and control systems. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with A A 591/E E 591/M E 591.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 591

CHEM E 593 Advanced Surface Analysis (3) D. CASTNER
Covers the latest advanced in surface analysis instrumentation and methodology, including advanced methods of biorecognition AFM, surface Plasmon resonance, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, sum frequency generation spectroscopy, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry, and multivariate analysis. Prerequisite: either CHEM E 558 or BIOEN 592. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 593; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 593

CHEM E 599 Current Topics in Chemical Engineering (1-5, max. 12)
Readings or lectures and discussions of topics of current interest in the field of chemical engineering. Subject matter changes from year to year. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 599

CHEM E 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 600

CHEM E 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 700

CHEM E 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CHEM E 800

NME 220 Introduction to Molecular and Nanoscale Principles (4) NW
Introduction to theories and concepts of molecular and nanoscale systems to raise awareness of technological and societal transformations anticipated through progress in nanotechnology. Prerequisite: either CHEM 142, CHEM 144, or CHEM 145; either MATH 126 or MATH 136; PHYS 121.
View course details in MyPlan: NME 220

NME 221 Nanoscience and Molecular Engineering Seminar I (1) Overney
Introduces nanoscience and molecular engineering, and offers the opportunity of a first intellectual and interdisciplinary forum with interactions with members of research groups in the field. First in a series of three. Prerequisite: NME 220, which may be taken concurrently. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: NME 221

NME 321 Nanoscience and Molecular Engineering Seminar II (1) Overney
Demonstrates how to tackle research challenges, put results into the framework of the open literature, and present and interpret data. Discusses contemporary societal and ethical aspects in nanoscience and molecular engineering. Second in a series of three. Recommended: NME 221. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: NME 321

NME 421 Nanoscience and Molecular Engineering Seminar III (1) Overney
Provides students with the opportunity to present their research results obtained during undergraduate research studies. Assessing the work of their peers and receiving feedback on their work, students further refine their ability in conducting and presenting research. Third in a series of three. Prerequisite: NME 321. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: NME 421

NME 498 Special Topics in Nanoscience and Molecular Engineering (1-4, max. 12) Overney
Topics of current interest in the field.
View course details in MyPlan: NME 498

CEE 100 Twenty-First Century Civil and Environmental Engineering (1)
Introduction to the modern discipline of civil and environmental engineering including major sub-disciplines, professional careers, projects, and departmental faculty. Explores the different disciplines and their relevance to today's students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 100

CEE 220 Introduction to Mechanics of Materials (4) NW Berman, Reed
Introduction to the concepts of stress, deformation, and strain in solid materials. Development of basic relationships among loads, stresses, and deflections of structural and machine elements such as rods, shafts, and beams. Load-carrying capacity of these elements under tension, compression, torsion, bending, and shear forces. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in A A 210. Offered: WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 220

CEE 250 Environmental Processes and flows (3) NW Brett
Introduces the concepts of environmental materials and energy balance within the context of Pacific Northwest case studies, in particular nutrient loading, eutrophication, hypoxia/fish kills, water treatment, and global climate change and its regional impacts on water resources and hydrologic cycles. Prerequisite: either MATH 120, or MATH 124. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 250

CEE 291 Introduction to AutoCAD for Civil Engineers (2) NW
Introduces engineering drafting and graphical communication. Application of drafting standards and structure, creating and modifying basic drawings in 2D and 3D drafting in AutoCAD. Introduction to reading plan sets and creating portions of plan sets applied to civil and environmental engineering fields. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 291

CEE 297 Foreign Study (3-5, max. 15)
For participants in approved foreign-study programs. May not be used to satisfy upper-division major requirements.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 297

CEE 298 Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering (1-5, max. 10)
Explores special topics in civil and environmental engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 298

CEE 299 Independent Project (1-5, max. 10)
Research on special topics under supervision of a faculty member. May not be used to satisfy upper-division major requirements. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 299

CEE 307 Construction Engineering (5)
Introduces construction engineering including construction methods, engineering economics, contracts, project delivery methods, plan and specifications, scheduling, estimating, productivity, environmental regulations, safety and green construction. Uses scheduling and estimating software tools and emphasizes communication engineering information. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 307

CEE 317 GeoSurveying (5)
Covers measurement and digital mapping techniques; integration of surveying methods and techniques, monitoring of structures; spatial data collection and integration with surveying data; adjustment of measurements, concepts of error; surveying control; coordinate systems, transformation; highway vertical curves; and Earthwork, leveling and datum consideration, photogrammetry, GPS, GIS, remote sensing, cadastral and construction surveys, digital mapping and drafting. Prerequisite: either MATH 126, MATH 134, MATH 135, or MATH 136; recommended: a course in statistics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 317

CEE 327 Transportation Engineering (5)
Studies vehicular transportation fundamentals including vehicle dynamics, geometric design, pavement design, traffic flow concepts, level of service analysis, intelligent transportation systems, travel demand prediction methods, freight logistics, and management of transportation systems. Includes a review of relevant vehicle operating characteristics. Prerequisite: PHYS 121; either MATH 126, MATH 134, MATH 135, or MATH 136. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 327

CEE 337 Construction Materials (5)
General treatment of physical and mechanical properties and engineering behavior of metallic and nonmetallic materials. Steel, aluminum, aggregates, portland cement concrete, bituminous materials, asphalt concrete, wood. Laboratory testing, instrumentation, and investigation into macro-behavior. Sustainability issues including recycling, energy requirements, and greenhouse gas production associated with the materials. Prerequisite: CEE 220. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 337

CEE 347 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics (5) Horner-Devine, Lundquist, Thomson
Introduces the mechanics of incompressible fluids and their applications. Hydrostatic pressure forces. Kinematics, potential flows, and the Bernoulli equation. Conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. Laminar and turbulent flows. Flow in pipes, pipe networks, and open channel flows. Prerequisite: CEE 220; M E 230; PHYS 122. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 347

CEE 357 Environmental Engineering (5)
Describes water and air resources, parameters that characterize their quality, and how their use alters their properties. Elements of hydrology. Mass and energy balances as applied to environmental systems. Global environmental change. Basics of aquatic chemistry and microbiology applied to municipal water and wastewater treatment operation. Groundwater contamination and treatment. Prerequisite: CHEM 142; either MATH 126, MATH 134, MATH 135, or MATH 136. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 357

CEE 367 Geotechnical Engineering (5) Arduino, Kramer, Wartman
Fundamental engineering properties of soil and rock; depositional processes and physical characteristics, hydro-conductive properties and advective flow; volume change characteristics including short- and long- term deformation; shear strength properties; and applications of basic concepts to practical problems such as foundation design and slope stability. Prerequisite: CEE 347. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 367

CEE 377 Introduction to Structural Design (5) Berman, Eberhard, Reed, Roeder
Introduces the concepts, approaches, procedures, and codes for the structural design. Characterization of structural loads. Structural systems and system behavior. Analysis of statically determinate structures and introduction to analysis of statically indeterminate structures including approximate methods. Introduction to the behavior and design of fundamental structural member. Prerequisite CEE 220. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 377

CEE 404 Infrastructure Construction (4) S. MUENCH
Basic concepts of large transportation infrastructure construction projects including planning, scheduling, life-cycle cost analysis (LCCA), construction cost, logistics, productivity and, where applicable, traffic impacts. Uses current and prototype industry software. Term project is designed around a large-scale I-5 pavement reconstruction project involving construction, traffic, and the interaction between the two. Involves presentations on a number of local transportation infrastructure projects. Prerequisite: CEE 307. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 404

CEE 409 Engineering Rome: Study Abroad ([1/4]-, max. 5) Muench
Covers Roman civil engineering over 3,000 years from Ancient Rome to the present day. Introduces civil engineering topics reinforced by practical engineering calculations, local experts, and site visits. Provides international and historical perspective on engineering and the contributions of engineers to infrastructure and society.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 409

CEE 410 Traffic Engineering Fundamentals (3)
General review of the fundamentals of traffic engineering, including their relationship to transportation operations management and planning, with emphasis on calculations and procedures in the Highway Capacity Manual; field surveys and data analysis. Prerequisite: CEE 327. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 410

CEE 412 Transportation Data Management (3) Wang
Introduction to modern concepts, theories, and tools for transportation data management and analysis. Applications of software tools for transportation data storage, information retrieval, knowledge discovery, data exchange, online information sharing, statistical analysis, system optimization, and decision support. Prerequisite: CEE 327. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 412

CEE 416 Urban Transportation Planning and Design (3)
Brief review of major issues in urban transportation planning. Planning process discussed and transportation models introduced. Uses a systems framework, including goals and objectives, evaluation, implementation, and monitoring. A design term project, individual or small groups, utilizes material presented on a contemporary problem. Prerequisite: CEE 327. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 416

CEE 418 Computer-Aided Planning of Urban Systems (3)
Survey of online planning applications; use of various on-line systems to solve urban systems design problems; investigations of hardware/software tradeoffs; human factors in man-computer systems design theory as it relates to problem-solving activity. Offered: jointly with URBDP 429.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 418

CEE 421 Pavement Design (3) J. MAHONEY
Current and developing procedures for the structural thickness design of pavements. Bituminous and concrete pavements for highways and special heavy loading. Elastic layered systems, slab theory. Maintenance and overlay design. Prerequisite: CEE 337. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 421

CEE 424 GIS for Civil Engineers (3)
GIS in civil engineering applications. Geographic and spatial data types and acquiring considerations. Data models and structures. Projections and transformations. Attribute-based operation, spatial operations. Surfaces and near neighbors. Training on Arc GIS software. Recommended: CEE 317. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 424

CEE 425 Reinforced Concrete Construction (3) D. JANSSEN
Processes in constructing reinforced concrete structures. Identification and development of solutions to potential constructability problems. Lectures augmented with industry speakers and a field trip to a building under construction. Requires senior or graduate standing in Civil Engineering or Construction Management and familiarity with reinforced concrete design/construction. Prerequisite: either CEE 291 or AutoCAD experience; a minimum grade of 2.5 in either CEE 428 or CEE 452. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 425

CEE 428 Lightweight Cementitious Composites ([0-2]-, max. 2) Janssen
Introduces the process of designing within constraints and introductory experimental design. Covers the importance of proper laboratory documentation. Examines the characteristics of cementitious binders and elementary composite behavior. Considers constructability. Interprets pre- and post-cracking elastic behavior. Includes organization and production of technical report the documents work performed. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 428

CEE 431 Seismology and Earthquake Engineering (3) NW
Presents an overview of earthquake processes and details of the characteristics of destructive ground motion; illustrates the effects of such motion on engineering structures; reviews current practice in estimating earthquake hazards for important structures such as nuclear power plants. Prerequisite: either ESS 310, MATH 126, MATH 134, or both MATH 307 and MATH 308. Offered: jointly with ESS 465.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 431

CEE 436 Foundation Design (3)
Design considerations for foundations and retaining structures. Subsurface investigations and determination of soil properties for design. Design of shallow and deep foundations and retaining structures. Foundations and soil considerations for waterfront structures. Prerequisite: CEE 367. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 436

CEE 437 Engineering Geology I (3)
General overview of engineering geology and its importance to civil engineers. Topics include geologic processes, hazards, subsurface investigations, classification of geologic materials, data synthesis, and natural construction materials.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 437

CEE 440 Professional Practice Studio (2)
Fundamentals of integrated civil engineering design, professional services marketing, project management, team dynamics, total quality management, value engineering, professional liability, and applied ethics in engineering practice. Emphasis on written and oral communications and on ethical, social, and economic factors. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 440

CEE 441 Transportation and Construction Capstone Design Project (4)
Comprehensive design project focusing on planning, design, and construction of a transportation project such as highways, transit, and airports. Prerequisite: CEE 327; CEE 440; either CEE 404, CEE 410, CEE 412, CEE 416, CEE 421, CEE 424, or CEE 425. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 441

CEE 442 Structural Geotechnical Capstone Design Project (5)
Comprehensive team design project focusing on structural and geotechnical engineering. Requires design drawings, written reports, and oral presentations interfacing with related fields such as aesthetics and architecture, mechanical systems, traffic, environmental planning. Prerequisite: CEE 440; two courses from CEE 436, CEE 451, CEE 452, CEE 453, CEE 454, CEE 456, or CEE 457. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 442

CEE 444 Water Resources and Hydraulic Engineering Capstone Design Project (5)
Opportunity to effect design solutions for projects or major project components in such representative areas as reservoirs and associated systems for flood control, water supply, irrigation, and hydroelectric power, surface water control systems, fisheries related projects, small harbors, and coastal engineering problems. Prerequisite: either CEE 345 or CEE 347; CEE 440; either CEE 475, CEE 476, CEE 482, CEE 483, or CEE 484. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 444

CEE 445 Environmental Engineering Capstone Design Project (5)
Individual and group design studies addressing environmental engineering problems such as stormwater management, water and wastewater treatment facilities, and residual processing. Prepare proposals, engineering reports, and alternative evaluations; process equipment design, present reports on selected design problems. Prerequisite: either CEE 345 or CEE 347; CEE 440; either CEE 473, CEE 475 CEE 476, CEE 481, CEE 482, CEE 483, or CEE 484. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 445

CEE 451 Design of Metal Structures (3) J. BERMAN, C. ROEDER
Introduction to the design and behavior of metal structures using LRFD concepts. Application of design methods and codes to columns, beams, frames, connections, and tension members. Prerequisite: CEE 377; recommended: CEE 456; CEE 458. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 451

CEE 452 Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures (3) D. LEHMAN, D. REED, J. STANTON
Fundamentals of design of buildings in reinforced concrete in accordance with current codes and practices. Prerequisite: CEE 377; recommended: CEE 457. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 452

CEE 453 Prestressed Concrete Design (3) Eberhard, Stanton
Analysis, design, and construction of prestressed concrete structures. Prerequisite: CEE 452. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 453

CEE 454 Design of Timber Structures (3) Berman, Reed
Includes the design and construction of timber structures, using elements made of sawn wood, glued-laminated wood, and manufactured wood products. Prerequisite: CEE 377. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 454

CEE 455 Structural Unit Masonry (3) Tawresey
Structural behavior and design of reinforced brick, tile, and unit concrete masonry structures. Prerequisite: CEE 377. Offered: jointly with ARCH 426.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 455

CEE 456 Structural Analysis (5) Berman, Eberhard, Lowes
Fundamental analysis and modeling of civil structural systems. Equilibrium, kinematics, and constitutive relations; formal solution procedures emphasizing element-based stiffness methods; computer-based and manual techniques; verification and interpretation of results; case studies involving real structures; introduction to finite element analysis of 2D continua. Prerequisite: CEE 377. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 456

CEE 457 Advanced Structures I (3) L. LOWES
Introduction to the finite element method for modeling civil structures. Formulation of line and continuum elements using virtual work and the principal of minimum potential energy. MATLAB programming of the finite element method. Use of commercial software to model real structures. Prerequisite: CEE 456. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 457

CEE 458 Advanced Structures II (3) Miller, Stanton
Introduction to stability, including a consideration of elastic and inelastic buckling with applications to beam-columns and plates. Introduction to plastic analysis. Prerequisite: CEE 456.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 458

CEE 459 Advanced Structural Mechanics (3)
Formulation and solution of the basic equations of elasticity. Applications in 2-D stress analysis, torsion, thermal stresses, and beams on elastic foundation. Plate theory optional. Prerequisite: CEE 377.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 459

CEE 462 Applied Limnology and Pollutant Effects on Freshwater (3) NW
Principles of aquatic ecology that relate to causes and effects of water quality problems in lakes and streams. Population growth kinetics, nutrient cycling, eutrophication; acidification, oxygen/temperature requirements, and effects of various wastes on aquatic animals. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 462

CEE 463 Limnology Laboratory (2) NW
Examination of biota of fresh waters, survey of limnological methods, analysis of data, and writing of scientific papers. Prerequisite: BIOL 473/FISH 473/CEE 462, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: jointly with BIOL 474/FISH 474; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 463

CEE 472 Introduction to Hydraulics in Water Resources (3)
Hydraulics related to environmental issues. Global hydrology; stratified flows; two-phase (bubble) flows; pollutant transport and mixing in reservoirs, lakes, coastal waters, and oceans; diffuser design and related case studies. Prerequisite: CEE 347.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 472

CEE 473 Coastal Engineering I (3) Thomson
Linear theory of water waves, wave transformations near shore, sediment motion, and elementary tidal theory; shoreline protection methods; and applications illustrated by selected case histories. Prerequisite: CEE 347.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 473

CEE 474 Hydraulics of Sediment Transport (3) A. HORNER-DEVINE
Introduction to sediment transport in steady flows with emphasis on physical principles governing the motion of sediment particles. Topics include sediment characteristics, initiation of particle motion, particle suspension, bedforms, streambed roughness analysis, sediment discharge formulae, and modeling of scour and deposition in rivers and channels. Prerequisite: CEE 347. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 474

CEE 475 Analysis Techniques for Groundwater Flow (3) R. NEUMANN
Presents the fundamentals of subsurface flow and transport, emphasizing the role of groundwater in hydrologic cycle, the relation of groundwater flow to geologic structure, and the management of contaminated groundwater. Concepts are applied to well-known hydrogeologic sites. Prerequisite: CEE 347. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 475

CEE 476 Physical Hydrology (3) Istanbulluoglu
Global water picture, data sources and data homogeneity, precipitation and streamflow hydrography analysis; calculation of surface runoff, evapotranspiration, and groundwater recharge. Hydrologic data frequency analysis and probability theory. Hydrologic design: flood mitigation, drainage. Introduction to deterministic and stochastic models. Prerequisite: CEE 347. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 476

CEE 477 Open-Channel Flow (3) Jessup.
Water flow in natural and engineered channels, rivers, and streams. Analysis and design of channels (lined, vegetated), flow controls (weirs, spillways), and structures affecting fish passage (culverts). Prediction of water surface profiles. Introduction to river mechanics. Design-oriented problems. Prerequisite: CEE 347. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 477

CEE 480 Air-Quality Modeling (3) NW
Evaluation of air-quality models relating air pollution emissions to environmental concentrations. Emphasis on models used for air pollution permits. Emphasizes current problems. Offered: jointly with ATM S 480; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 480

CEE 481 Hydraulic Design for Environmental Engineering (3) E. ISTANBULLUOGLU
Introduction to the theory and the practice of planning and design of urban water supply distribution, pump stations, sewage and storm-water collection systems, and green stormwater infrastructure. Engineering methods and computer programs are applied for designing basic system elements. Prerequisite: CEE 347; CEE 357. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 481

CEE 482 Wastewater Treatment and Reuse (3)
Introduces wastewater treatment and systems, emphasizing fundamental biological, chemical, and physical processes related to protection of public health environmental quality and water reuse. Process analysis of the configuration and sizing of major types of treatment processes for various sizes of plants and effluent requirements. Prerequisite: CEE 357. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 482

CEE 483 Drinking Water Treatment (3)
Studies scientific, engineering, and regulatory principles underlying drinking water treatment; development of conceptual models for how and why treatment processes work and mathematical models describing their performance under various design and operating scenarios; field trips to water treatment systems. Prerequisite: CEE 357. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 483

CEE 484 Decentralized and On-Site Wastewater Management and Reuse (3)
Design and performance of on-site and decentralized wastewater treatment. Determination of appropriate alternatives based on endpoints of water reuse, economics, policy, management, water quality, and ecological considerations. Meeting sanitation and water reuse for situations including, individual homes, rural areas, developing countries, and high density urban dwellings. Prerequisite: CEE 357.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 484

CEE 487 Solid-Waste Disposal (3)
Describes sources and handling of municipal and industrial solid waste, with examination of collection, processing, recycling and resource recovery, and disposal alternatives. Public policy issues, local agencies and solid waste facilities, the legal and regulatory framework are all addressed in context of solid waste engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 487

CEE 488 Hazardous Wastes Engineering (3)
Classification of hazardous wastes; resource conservation, Recovery Act regulations; characteristics and behavior of toxic organics; superfund; groundwater contamination, solutions. Hazardous waste site remedial action; case histories; sampling; landfill design. Stabilization and processing technologies, including incineration, carbon adsorption, emerging techniques. Prerequisite: CEE 357. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 488

CEE 489 Water and Air Quality Sampling (2)
Samples collected from lakes, streams, precipitation, and air. Resulting (and supplemental) data interpreted for cause-effect and statistical inference. Design for water and air quality monitoring programs. Prerequisite: CEE 462.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 489

CEE 490 Air-Pollution Control (4)
Fundamental concepts of air pollution Control including emission sources, atmospheric dispersion, ambient concentrations, and emission standards, with emphasis on processes and equipment for controlling emissions. Offered: jointly with ENV H 461; ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 490

CEE 491 Deterministic Systems (3)
Development of quantitative methods for mathematical problem solving with emphasis on computer applications. Linear programming, mathematics of the simplex algorithm, sensitivity analysis, dynamic programming, systems simulation, and goal programming. Class project required. Recommended: a course in statistics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 491

CEE 492 Stochastic Systems (3)
Introduction to probability distributions and statistics useful in systems analysis, conditional distributions, queuing theory and applications, Monte Carlo simulation, chance-constrained mathematical programming, and stochastic dynamic programming. Emphasis on application of the techniques to civil engineering systems problems, including transportation, water resources, and structures. Prerequisite: CEE 491.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 492

CEE 493 Air-Pollution Source Testing and Equipment Evaluation (3)
Engineering evaluation of air pollutant sources and air control equipment. Fundamentals of source testing and stack sampling, including laboratory exercises.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 493

CEE 494 Air-Pollution Control Equipment Design (3)
Designs to control air pollutants from stationary sources. Procedures for calculating design and operating parameters. Fundamental mechanisms and processes of gaseous and particulate control equipment for absorption and adsorption of gaseous pollutants; electrostatic precipitation and filtration of particulate pollutants. Actual case studies. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 468/M E 468.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 494

CEE 495 Sustainability and Design for Environment (3) Cooper
Analysis and design of technology systems within the context of the environment, economy, and society. Applies the concepts of resource conservation, pollution prevention, life cycle assessment, and extended product responsibility. Examines the practice, opportunities, and role of engineering, management, and public policy. Offered: jointly with ENVIR 415/M E 415.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 495

CEE 496 Fate and Transport of Chemicals in the Environment (3) Neumann
Presents a general introduction to the fundamental physical, chemical, and biological processes governing the movement and fate of chemicals in surface water and groundwater. Provides basic literacy in environment transport and fate processes, creating a solid foundation for accessing and synthesizing material on these topics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 496

CEE 497 Engineering Jordan: Water in an Arid Land Study Abroad (5) Gough
Examines impacts of a hot dry climate on water engineering systems by studying the engineered water cycle in Jordan including: water cycles and sources in Jordan; drinking water treatment and desalination; wastewater treatment and reuse; decentralized and on-site treatment; and ancient water engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 497

CEE 498 Special Topics (1-5, max. 12)
Special topics in civil engineering offered as course with lecture or laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 498

CEE 499 Independent Study/Research (1-5, max. 12)
Individual undergraduate research project. Recommended: 400-level CEE course.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 499

CEE 500 Civil and Environmental Engineering Seminars (1, max. 3)
Prerequisite: graduate standing in Civil and Environmental Engineering. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 500

CEE 501 Structural Mechanics (6) Mackenzie, Miller
Equations of a continuum for small displacements, applications to linear elasticity. Kirchoff plate theory, problems in advanced strength of materials. Virtual work, minimum potential energy, force and displacement methods of structural analysis. Direct stiffness method. Approximate solutions, geometric stiffness matrix. Linearized buckling. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 501

CEE 502 Structural Dynamics (3) Eberhard, Stanton
Lagrange's equations. Free vibrations of linear, single, and multiple degree of freedom systems. Damping. Mode superposition. Forced vibrations by time history and by response spectrum methods. Free and forced vibrations of continuous systems. Wave propagation in rods and beams. Prerequisite: CEE 501. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 502

CEE 503 Materials Modeling (3)
Behavior of materials used in civil engineering structures. Yield and failure surfaces. Physical and phenomenological models of plastic and viscoelastic behavior. Fracture mechanics. Fatigue models and predictions. Damping and friction. Behavior of anisotropic and composite materials. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 503

CEE 504 Finite Element Methods in Structural Mechanics (3) Mackenzie, Lowes, Miller
Extension of the matrix methods of structural analysis to the solution of elasticity, plate, and shell problems by use of finite element approximations. Discussion of convergence and bounding and extension to investigation of stability and finite deformations. Prerequisite: CEE 501 or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 504

CEE 505 Engineering Computing (3) Lowes, Mackenzie, Miller
Applied computing in civil and environmental engineering contexts, including physical systems modeling, graphics and visualization, and data management. Program development using contemporary tools and strategies. Computer architecture fundamentals, theoretical and practical issues affecting memory use and performance. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 505

CEE 506 Nonlinear Analysis of Structural Systems (3) Lowes, Miller, Mackenzie
Formulation, solution, and interpretation of nonlinear numerical models of structural systems. Material and geometric nonlinearities for truss, beam, and frame systems. Resultant-based material laws. Large deformations. Solutions procedures, arc-length methods. Introduction to parameter identification. Prerequisite: CEE 501. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 506

CEE 509 Engineering Rome: Study Abroad ([1/4]-, max. 5) Muench
Covers Roman civil engineering over 3,000 years from Ancient Rome to the present day. Introduces civil engineering topics reinforced by practical engineering calculations, local experts, and site visits. Provides international and historical perspective on engineering and the contributions of engineers to infrastructure and society.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 509

CEE 511 Advanced Reinforced Concrete (3) Eberhard, Stanton
Behavior and design of reinforced concrete members and structures. Members subject to torsion and torsion combined with flexure and shear; members with small shear span/depth ratios, slabs. Prerequisite: CEE 452 or equivalent. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 511

CEE 512 Advanced Structural Systems (3) Eberhard, Stanton
Examines structural design of floor systems for buildings, including one-way and two-way slabs, strip method, yield line theory, prestressed concrete slabs. Lateral load resisting systems for buildings. Prerequisite: CEE 453; CEE 502. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 512

CEE 513 Advanced Steel I (3) Berman, Roeder
Factors influencing strength and serviceability of steel structures; LRFD limit state design procedures. Use of theories of plasticity and stability in development of design methods and specifications, bolted and welded connections, temperature effects, and affect of different fabrication methods on behavior of structure. Prerequisite: CEE 501. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 513

CEE 515 Earthquake Engineering I (3) Roeder
Earthquake mechanism and ground shaking, response spectra, linear elastic methods for prediction of behavior, displacement prediction methods for inelastically behaving structures, modeling and solution schemes, earthquake design philosophy, capacity design. Reinforced concrete, steel, and base-isolated structures. Prerequisite: CEE 501, CEE 502. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 515

CEE 516 Earthquake Engineering II (3) Roeder
Performance-based design, development of fragility curves, characteristics and effects of ground-shaking records, design methods, passive and active control, dynamic inelastic time history analysis, design of parts, system detailing, soil-structure interaction, repair and retrofit of structures. Prerequisite: CEE 515. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 516

CEE 517 Wind Engineering Design (3) Reed
Wind effects on structures, including atmospheric boundary layer flow; bluff body aerodynamics; structural dynamics and aeroelasticity; development and use of the ASCE Standards; estimation of along-wind, across-wind, and torsional response of tall buildings; design strategies for avoiding wind-induced discomfort. Fundamentals of wind tunnel testing. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 517

CEE 518 Reliability and Design (3) Reed
Introduction to theory of structural reliability and its application to design procedures in civil engineering, including probability theory; assessment of uncertainties; code specification and the related concept of risk and the influence of socioeconomic factors; loads, load combinations, and probabilities of damage. Offered: AS.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 518

CEE 521 Seepage and Consolidation (3)
Confined and unconfined seepage through porous media, flow net solutions, consolidation, settlement, numerical solution of seepage, and consolidation problems. Prerequisite: CEE 367 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 521

CEE 522 Shear Strength and Slope Stability (3)
Shear strength of cohesive and granular soils and slope stability analysis of natural and man-made slopes. Prerequisite: CEE 367 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 522

CEE 523 Advanced Foundation Engineering (3)
Design of shallow and deep foundations for bearing capacity and settlement. Construction considerations. Prerequisite: CEE 522 and CEE 527.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 523

CEE 524 Lateral Earth Pressures and Retaining Structures (3)
Lateral earth pressure theory. Design of temporary and permanent retaining structures including in situ reinforcement. Prerequisite: CEE 523; CEE 527.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 524

CEE 525 Soil Dynamics (3)
Dynamics of discrete systems; dynamics of continuous systems, wave propagation; dynamic soil properties; linear, nonlinear, and equivalent linear ground response analysis; vibrations of footings; construction vibrations; vibration isolation.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 525

CEE 526 Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering (3)
Plate tectonics and elastic rebound theory of earthquakes and faults; characterization of ground motions; seismicity; seismic risk analysis; effect of local soil conditions on ground response; development of design ground motions; liquefaction; dynamic lateral earth pressures; seismic slope stability. Prerequisite: CEE 525 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 526

CEE 527 Advanced Geotechnical Laboratory (4)
Soil and site investigation, classification and engineering properties of soils and rock as determined by standard and advanced test procedures and equipment. Evaluation of test data. Report writing. Prerequisite: CEE 367 or equivalent. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 527

CEE 528 Geosynthetic Engineering (3)
Identification and testing of geosynthetics. Design of geosynthetic filters, roadway stabilization, earth reinforcement, and waste containment systems. Prerequisite: CEE 522 and CEE 523.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 528

CEE 529 Foundation Soil Improvement (3)
Analysis and design of physical and chemical treatment techniques commonly applied to problem foundation soils for civil engineering structure. Prerequisite: CEE 523.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 529

CEE 530 Engineering Geology II (3)
Application of engineering geology fundamentals to: location, design, and maintenance of engineered structures; policy decisions related to potential geological hazards. Case histories, governmental policy discussions, interpretation of geological maps for engineering purposes. Prerequisite: CEE 437 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 530

CEE 531 Rock Engineering (3)
Engineering classification, physical and mechanical properties of rocks, failure modes and initial stresses in rocks, laboratory and field testing of rocks, rock slope engineering, underground openings, foundations on rocks. Prerequisite: CEE 437 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 531

CEE 540 Microbiological Process Fundamentals (3) Stahl
Fundamental concepts for microbial processes including organic chemical structure, nomenclature and environmental properties, principles of microbial metabolism, study of specific types of bacteria important to environmental engineering and their metabolism, development of microbial kinetic equations, including substrate utilization, energetics, and stoichiometry. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 540

CEE 541 Biological Treatment Systems (3)
Basic reactions, design principles, current design models, and operational considerations for biological treatment systems used in environmental engineering. Applications include activated sludge design and optimization, fixed film reactors, nitrification, nitrogen removal, phosphorus removal, anaerobic treatment, biomethane production, resource recovery, and toxic organics removal. Prerequisite: either both CEE 540 and CEE 482 or equivalent. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 541

CEE 543 Aquatic Chemistry (4)
Principles of chemical equilibrium applicable to natural water systems and water and waste treatment processes. Chemical thermodynamics. Characteristics of acid/base, gas/liquid, solid/liquid, and oxidation/reduction equilibria. Computer models for chemical speciation. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 543

CEE 544 Physical-Chemical Treatment Processes (4)
Principles and design of major physical-chemical unit processes used in water, wastewater, and hazardous waste treatment. Topics include chemical kinetics, reactor design and analysis, ion exchange, adsorption, and gas transfer. Development of mathematical models and evaluation of current design practice. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 544

CEE 545 Environmental Organic Chemistry (3)
Covers characterization and modeling of properties and processes governing the distribution, fate, and transformation of organic pollutants in environmental systems. Explores linear free energy relationships and their application to examining the water/soil/air partitioning, bioaccumulation, substitution and redox reaction kinetics, and abiotic transformations of organic pollutants. Prerequisite: CEE 543 or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 545

CEE 546 Topics in Ecological Effects of Wastewater (3)
Application of ecological concepts for analysis and interpretation of bioenvironmental problems and data (eutrophication, acid rain, and toxicity). Students participate in presentation and discussion of current research. Prerequisite: CEE 462 or BIOL 473 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 546

CEE 547 Lake and Watershed Management (3)
Application of current techniques for lake and watershed analysis and modeling using fundamentals of limnology. Approaches to restoring eutrophic lakes, land use impacts on water quality. Practical exercises using data from real lake systems. Prerequisite: CEE 462/FISH 434, BIOL 473, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 547

CEE 549 Advanced Topics in Environmental Engineering, Chemistry, and Biology (3)
Special topics of current importance in environmental engineering. Application of fundamental chemical and biological principles to the study of such phenomena as the behavior of aqueous colloids, corrosion processes, and bacterial metabolism in chemically complex solutions. Prerequisite: CEE 540, CEE 541. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 549

CEE 550 Environmental Chemical Modeling (3)
Physical/chemical principles controlling the fate and distribution of environmental pollutants, and use of models to apply those principles. Includes modeling of physical transport in conjunction with chemical equilibrium and reaction kinetics. Applications focus on groundwater systems. Prerequisite: CEE 541. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 550

CEE 551 Fate and Transport of Chemicals in the Environment (3) Neumann
Presents a general introduction to the fundamental physical, chemical, and biological processes governing the movement and fate of chemicals in surface water and groundwater. Provides basic literacy in environment transport and fate processes, creating a solid foundation for accessing and synthesizing material on these topics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 551

CEE 552 Environmental Regulations (3) I&S
Principal emphasis on regulations pertaining to construction site stormwater runoff, including regulatory background and requirements, how to analyze potential site problems and prepare plans to solve them, and specifying practices to avoid or reduce water pollutant releases. Briefer coverage of regulations concerning air pollutions, wetlands, hazardous wastes, and endangered species.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 552

CEE 553 Seminar - Topics in Atmospheric Chemistry (1-3, max. 6)
Seminar for atmospheric scientists, chemists, engineers in problems associated with the chemical composition of the atmosphere. Covers wide variety of topics, ranging from the natural system to urban pollution and global atmospheric change. Prerequisite: ATM S 301 or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ATM S 525.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 553

CEE 554 Acoustics of Environmental Noise (4)
Offered: jointly with M E 528.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 554

CEE 555 Topics in Environmental Health (3)
Introduction to human biology, including physiology, epidemiology, and toxicology. Study of contemporary environmental health problems and practices as they relate to radiological health, solid-waste disposal, occupational health, biometeorology, and bioengineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 555

CEE 557 Air Resources Management (3)
Technical, administrative, and legal aspects of air conservation. Topics include urban and regional scale air quality measurement and modeling systems, receptor modeling based on chemical fingerprinting of sources and current case studies involving engineering analysis, air-quality modeling, and regulatory aspects at local, state, and federal governmental levels. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 557

CEE 560 Risk Assessment for Environmental Health Hazards (3/4)
Examines context, methodologies, data, uncertainties, and institutional arrangements for risk assessment. Qualitative and quantitative approaches to identification, characterization, and control of environmental hazards to health emphasized through didactic and case studies. Offered: jointly with ENV H 577/PB AF 589; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 560

CEE 561 Transportation Planning and Design (4) Avery
Provides an overview of transportation planning and how sustainability fits into this field. Topics include institutional frameworks, legal/legislative issues, land use, capacity analysis, supply management and Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). Covers tasks/tools of transportation planning at the site, city, region, and state levels. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 561

CEE 562 Livable Communities and Design (4) Bassok
Explores the positives and negatives affecting livability. Covers sprawl and compact cities, energy issues and environmental quality, transit-oriented and traditional neighborhood development, and mixed-use and mixed income developments. Includes context-sensitive solutions to transportation projects. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 562

CEE 563 Transportation Choices and Technology (4) Rutherford
Explores the range of sustainable transportation choices for both people and goods. Studies passenger modes of transportation including bicycles, single-occupancy vehicles, care and van pools, shared autos, bus, rail, ferries, trolleys, and foot travel in the context of sustainability. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 563

CEE 564 Sustainable Transportation from a Systems Perspective (5) McCormack
Covers tools to evaluate and develop sustainable transportation systems. Emphasizes design approaches that support sustainable transportation, methods to evaluate the full life cycle impacts of transportation systems, and tools to assess transportation networks as resilient systems. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 564

CEE 565 Climate Change and Energy (5) Larson, Mahoney
Covers the nature of global climate systems, global warming, ozone depletion, and human influences. Introduces tools to evaluate current and alternative energy production and conversion options for transportation. Explores the nexus between transportation and energy in the context of climate change adaptation and mitigation. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 565

CEE 566 Environmental Analysis and Assessment (5) Watkins
Reviews statistical methods necessary to analyze environmental issues. Uses environmental data to demonstrate how significant impacts are measured and reported. Discusses transportation data sources, sustainable transportation indicators, and related statistical analysis. Includes travel demand forecasting and a review of engineering economy. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 566

CEE 567 Health and Sustainable Transportation (5) Rowangould
Examines how transportation policy is driven by human health impacts. Highlights water and air impacts on health along with the health benefit of human powered transportation. Presents legal and regulatory issues. Case studies provide examples of application of these principles to real world transportation issues. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 567

CEE 568 Transportation Economics (5) Niemeier
Economics applied to transportation planning, operations, maintenance, and management problems; microeconomic and macroeconomic theories; benefit-cost analysis; and the effect of uncertainty. Presents the effect of tolls, parking pricing, transit subsides, and other pricing and incentive policies. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 568

CEE 569 Policy Development, Finance, and Sustainable Transportation (5) Rutherford
Covers the development and implementation of transportation policies to support sustainable transportation systems. Reviews regulations and finance opportunities at the local, state, and federal level highlighting those that promote sustainable transportation. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 569

CEE 570 Hydrodynamics (4) A. HORNER-DEVINE
Applications of the equations of motion to ideal and real fluid flow, with topics in Environmental Fluid Mechanics. Kinematics, Navier-Stokes equations, viscous flows, Coriolis, density driven flows, free surface flows, and introduction to turbulence. Applications include: tidal flushing, lakes, estuaries, gravity currents and river plumes. Prerequisite: CEE 357 or equivalent. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 570

CEE 571 Hydrodynamics in Water Quality (3)
Theoretical, field study, and laboratory model approaches to diffusion in transport problems of concern to water resources engineers. Prerequisite: CEE 342 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 571

CEE 572 Water Wave Mechanics (3)
Theory of water waves. Classical water wave problem and approximate solution techniques. Evolution equations for and their solutions wave systems. Viscous damping effects and mass transport. Nonlinear shallow-water waves and the Korteweg-deVries equation. Waves on beaches. Prerequisite: CEE 342 or permission of instructor; recommended: graduate-level course in fluid mechanics.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 572

CEE 573 Snow Hydrology (3) Lundquist
Introduces snow hydrology research, emphasizing current research methods and results in both measurements and modeling. Explores the impact of snow on hydrology and water resources. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 573

CEE 574 Advanced Hydrology (3) E. ISTANBULLUOGLU
Detailed treatment of statistical methods used in hydrology: trend analysis, hypothesis testing, flood frequency, and elements of stochastic hydrology and data generation. Detailed examination of hydrologic models with emphasis on evapotranspiration and water budget, use of a watershed model (e.g., Stanford Watershed Model) in catchment. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 574

CEE 576 Water Resources Planning (3)
Engineering, social, and economic factors involved in water resource development and management; water policies, programs, and administration; use relationships and conflicts; considerations for regional water resource systems.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 576

CEE 577 Water-Quality Management (3)
Application of biological, ecological, and chemical processes to modeling of water quality and use of such models in appropriate management of water resource systems. Includes units on the modeling of temperature, BOD, nutrient, phytoplankton, zooplankton, and other processes in lakes, streams, and estuaries. Recommended: CEE 476; CEE 485; CEE 462/FISH 434; CEE 491. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 577

CEE 578 Water Resource System Management and Operations (3)
Readings in recent literature related to the modeling and management of water resources. Topics include drought management, expansion of existing water supplies, hydropower production, streamflow forecasting, water demand forecasting, regional water planning, climate change, and other topical issues. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 578

CEE 579 Advanced Traffic Detection Systems (3) Wang
Introduction to advanced tracking and detection technologies in transportation engineering, including Global Positioning Systems (GPS), inductance loop detection systems, remote traffic microwave radar, computer-vision based technologies, and other emerging detection technologies with cutting-edge research in these areas.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 579

CEE 580 Urban Transportation Planning (4) Rutherford
Introduction to transportation planning, including trends and issues, land use and transportation interaction, surveys, public involvement, demand management, technology, forecasting, impacts, and policy strategies. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 580

CEE 581 Travel Demand Forecasting (4)
Application of mathematical models to forecast urban travel behavior. Introduces emerging methods, land use models, travel demand models, including trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice, and network assignment. Discusses validation and ethics. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 581

CEE 582 Intelligent Transportation Systems (3)
Application of modern computer and communication technologies to transportation systems. Benefits to public agencies, commercial companies, and travelers. Coordination between private and public sectors. Intelligent Transportation System's (ITS) social, organizational, and operational changes. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 582

CEE 584 Analytical Methods in Transportation I (3) Boyle
Application of analytical and statistical methods to issues in transportation and driving. Analysis of probability distributions that describe variables. Development of statistical models for predicting transportation phenomena. Elementary sampling theory hypothesis testing, regression analysis, time series analysis, applied to transportation data. Offered: jointly with IND E 546; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 584

CEE 585 Analytical Methods in Transportation II (3)
Applications of advanced econometric methods to transportation issues. Topics include, but not limited to, systems of equations, duration models, limited dependent variable approaches, and count models. Hands-on modeling, with numerous data sets, available for application. Collaborative projects. Prerequisite: CEE 584 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 585

CEE 586 Pedestrian Travel, Land Use, and Urban Form (3)
Seminar concentrating on walking as a mode of transportation in cities and city-regions, including social, cognitive, and perceptual dimensions of pedestrian movement and behavior theory. Offered: jointly with URBDP 576.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 586

CEE 587 Global Trade, Transportation, and Logistics Management (4)
Provides an overview of trade, transportation, and logistics activities. Develops an understanding of the physical and information flows in supply chains, and the economic drivers of supply chain choices. Includes methods to analyze and improve logistics and transportation systems, including applications of policy, technology, and infrastructure. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 587

CEE 588 Energy Infrastructure and the Environment (3) Larson, Mahoney
Focuses on energy infrastructure, including site selection, permitting, design, construction, and maintenance. Includes electrical production facilities as well as transmission, focusing on permitting and construction of renewable energy facilities. Covers renewable energy infrastructure, emphasizing wind, solar, and geothermal. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 588

CEE 589 Transit Systems Planning (3)
Planning, operational methods for urban public transportation. Review of technological, operating characteristics of vehicles and systems; financing, management, institutional aspects. Paratransit. Short-range planning, operational strategies, revenue-fare structures. Service monitoring. Mode choice, transit demand relating to service. Computer-aided methods for planning, design of transit systems. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 589

CEE 590 Traffic Systems Operations (3) Goodchild, McCormack
Operational planning, management of arterial and freeway traffic systems. Review of transportation system management strategies to achieve more efficient use of existing infrastructure, including improved and innovative traffic control systems and demand management policies, measures of effectiveness, impact assessment, traveler response. Introduction to use of relevant computer models and packages. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 590

CEE 591 Freight Transportation (3)
Overview of the technical and institutional aspects of transporting freight. Topics include the different modes of moving freight, the technology of transferring freight between modes at ports and terminals, issues that impact freight movement such as congestion and government regulation, and the future of freight mobility. Also covers regional freight demand modeling techniques. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 591

CEE 592 Statistical Fundamentals for Construction and Materials Applications (3) S. MUENCH
Overview of statistical measures used in various construction and materials decision-making processes. Subjects include data distributions, hypothesis tests (making decisions with statistics), regression analysis, sampling, quality control and assurance, and experimental design. Uses construction data to illustrate these measures. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 592

CEE 593 Construction Labor Law (3) Goldblatt
In-depth study of construction labor topics, including labor-management organization, legislation, and regulation, collective bargaining, and job site administration. Examines importance of labor relations in construction firms, whether in a union setting or an open shop environment.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 593

CEE 594 Computer-Aided Construction (3)
Application of information technology to construction management and cost estimating. Topics include, but not limited to, computerized construction, fundamentals of computer hardware, construction management software tools, web publishing, GPS application, and construction data management. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 594

CEE 595 Construction Materials (3) Mahoney
Examines the use of aggregates, bituminous mixtures, Portland cement concrete, roller compacted concrete, soil and site stabilization, utility cuts, and flowable backfill in construction projects. Emphasis on behavior of materials in various construction applications. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 595

CEE 596 Pavement Construction (3) Muench
Examines pavement construction, including pavement contracts and specifications, quality control and assurance programs, and plant and laydown operations. Reviews both national and international pavement construction practices. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 596

CEE 598 Engineering Jordan: Water in an Arid Land Study Abroad (5) Gough
Examines impacts of a hot dry climate on water engineering systems by studying the engineered water cycle in Jordan including: water cycles and sources in Jordan; drinking water treatment and desalination; wastewater treatment and reuse; decentralized and on-site treatment; and ancient water engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 598

CEE 599 Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering (1-5, max. 20)
Special topics in civil and environmental engineering offered occasionally by permanent or visiting faculty members.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 599

CEE 600 Independent Study or Research ([2-5]-)
Topics covered depend on faculty and student interest. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 600

CEE 601 Internship (2)
Internship in an established program between industry, government, and the University. Prerequisite: permission of Graduate Program Coordinator and committee chair.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 601

CEE 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of adviser.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 700

CEE 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of adviser.
View course details in MyPlan: CEE 800

CSE 120 Computer Science Principles (5) NW, QSR
Introduces fundamental concepts of computer science and computational thinking. Includes logical reasoning, problem solving, data representation, abstraction, the creation of digital artifacts such as web pages and programs, managing complexity, operation of computers and networks, effective web searching, ethical, legal and social aspects of information technology. May not be taken for credit if credit earned in CSE 100/INFO 100.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 120

CSE 131 Science and Art of Digital Photography (4) VLPA Hemingway
Covers the fundamentals of digital photography, including computational imaging; the elements of photographic composition and design; and the future of internet-enabled photography.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 131

CSE 142 Computer Programming I (4) NW, QSR
Basic programming-in-the-small abilities and concepts including procedural programming (methods, parameters, return values), basic control structures (sequence, if/else, for loop, while loop), file processing, arrays and an introduction to defining objects. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 142

CSE 143 Computer Programming II (5) NW, QSR
Continuation of CSE 142. Concepts of data abstraction and encapsulation including stacks, queues, linked lists, binary trees, recursion, instruction to complexity and use of predefined collection classes. Prerequisite: CSE 142. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 143

CSE 154 Web Programming (5) QSR
Covers languages, tools, and techniques for developing interactive and dynamic web pages. Topics include page styling, design, and layout; client and server side scripting; web security; and interacting with data sources such as databases. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in either CSE 140, CSE 142, or CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 154

CSE 190 Current Topics in Computer Science and Engineering (1-5, max. 15)
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 190

CSE 311 Foundations of Computing I (4) QSR
Examines fundamentals of logic, set theory, induction, and algebraic structures with applications to computing; finite state machines; and limits of computability. Prerequisite: CSE 143; either MATH 126 or MATH 136.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 311

CSE 312 Foundations of Computing II (4) QSR
Examines fundamentals of enumeration and discrete probability; applications of randomness to computing; polynomial-time versus NP; and NP-completeness. Prerequisite: CSE 311; CSE 332, which may be taken concurrently.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 312

CSE 331 Software Design and Implementation (4)
Explores concepts and techniques for design and construction of reliable and maintainable software systems in modern high-level languages; program structure and design; program-correctness approaches, including testing; and event-driven programming (e.g., graphical user interface). Includes substantial project and software-team experience. Prerequisite: CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 331

CSE 332 Data Abstractions (4)
Covers abstract data types and structures including dictionaries, balanced trees, hash tables, priority queues, and graphs; sorting; asymptotic analysis; fundamental graph algorithms including graph search, shortest path, and minimum spanning trees; concurrency and synchronization; and parallelism. Not available for credit for students who have completed CSE 373. Prerequisite: CSE 311.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 332

CSE 333 Systems Programming (4)
Includes substantial programming experience in languages that expose machine characteristics and low-level data representation (e.g., C and C++); explicit memory management; interacting with operating-system services; and cache-aware programming. Prerequisite: CSE 351.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 333

CSE 341 Programming Languages (4)
Basic concepts of programming languages, including abstraction mechanisms, types, and scoping. Detailed study of several different programming paradigms, such as functional, object-oriented, and logic programming. No credit if CSE 413 has been taken. Prerequisite: CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 341

CSE 344 Introduction to Data Management (4)
Introduces database management systems and writing applications that use such systems; data models (e.g., relational, semi-structured), query languages (e.g., SQL, XQuery), language bindings, conceptual modeling, transactions, security, database tuning, data warehousing, parallelism, and web-data management. Prerequisite: CSE 311.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 344

CSE 351 The Hardware/Software Interface (4)
Examines key computational abstraction levels below modern high-level languages; number representation, assembly language, introduction to C, memory management, the operating-system process model, high-level machine architecture including the memory hierarchy, and how high-level languages are implemented. Prerequisite: CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 351

CSE 352 Hardware Design and Implementation (4)
Covers digital circuit design, processor design, and systems integration and embedded-systems issues. Includes substantial hardware laboratory. Prerequisite: CSE 311; CSE 351.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 352

CSE 373 Data Structures and Algorithms (3)
Fundamental algorithms and data structures for implementation. Techniques for solving problems by programming. Linked lists, stacks, queues, directed graphs. Trees: representations, traversals. Searching (hashing, binary search trees, multiway trees). Garbage collection, memory management. Internal and external sorting. Intended for non-majors. Not open for credit to students who have completed CSE 332. Prerequisite: CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 373

CSE 374 Intermediate Programming Concepts and Tools (3)
Covers key software development concepts and tools not in introductory courses. Concepts of lower-level programming (C/C++) and explicit memory management; techniques and tools for individual and group software development; design, implementation, and testing strategies. Intended for non-majors. Cannot be taken for credit if credit received for CSE 333. Prerequisite: CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 374

CSE 390 Special Topics in Computer Science and Engineering (1-5, max. 10)
Covers topics of current interest in computer science and engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 390

CSE 399 CSE Foreign Study (*)
Upper-division computer science or computer engineering course, taken through an approved study abroad program, for which there is no direct University of Washington equivalent. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 399

CSE 401 Introduction to Compiler Construction (4)
Fundamentals of compilers and interpreters; symbol tables; lexical analysis, syntax analysis, semantic analysis, code generation, and optimizations for general purpose programming languages. No credit to students who have taken CSE 413. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 351.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 401

CSE 403 Software Engineering (4)
Fundamentals of software engineering using a group project as the basic vehicle. Topics covered include the software crisis, managing complexity, requirements specification, architectural and detailed design, testing and analysis, software process, and tools and environments. Prerequisite: CSE 331; CSE 332; recommended: either CSE 331 or project experience in a work setting.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 403

CSE 410 Computer Systems (3)
Structure and components of hardware and software systems. Machine organization, including central processor and input-output architectures; assembly language programming; operating systems, including process, storage, and file management. Intended for non-majors. No credit to students who have completed CSE 351 or CSE 451. Prerequisite: CSE 373.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 410

CSE 413 Programming Languages and Their Implementation (3)
Basic concepts and implementation strategies for modern functional and object-oriented programming languages such as Scheme and Java. Intended for non-majors. No credit to students who have completed CSE 341 or CSE 401. Prerequisite: CSE 373.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 413

CSE 414 Introduction to Database Systems (4)
Introduces database management systems and writing applications that use such systems; data models, query languages, transactions, database tuning, data warehousing, and parallelism. Intended for non-majors. Not open for credit to students who have completed CSE 344. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.5 in CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 414

CSE 415 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (3) NW
Principles and programming techniques of artificial intelligence: LISP, symbol manipulation, knowledge representation, logical and probabilistic reasoning, learning, language understanding, vision, expert systems, and social issues. Intended for non-majors. Not open for credit to students who have completed CSE 473. Prerequisite: CSE 373.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 415

CSE 417 Algorithms and Computational Complexity (3)
Design and analysis of algorithms and data structures. Efficient algorithms for manipulating graphs and strings. Fast Fourier Transform. Models of computation, including Turing machines. Time and space complexity. NP-complete problems and undecidable problems. Intended for non-majors. Prerequisite: CSE 373.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 417

CSE 421 Introduction to Algorithms (3)
Techniques for design of efficient algorithms. Methods for showing lower bounds on computational complexity. Particular algorithms for sorting, searching, set manipulation, arithmetic, graph problems, pattern matching. Prerequisite: CSE 312; CSE 332.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 421

CSE 427 Computational Biology (3)
Algorithmic and analytic techniques underlying analysis of large-scale biological data sets such as DNA, RNA, and protein sequences or structures, expression and proteomic profiling. Hands-on experience with databases, analysis tools, and genome markers. Applications such as sequence alignment, BLAST, phylogenetics, and Markov models. Prerequisite: CSE 312; CSE 332.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 427

CSE 428 Computational Biology Capstone (5)
Designs and implements a software tool or software analysis for an important problem in computational molecular biology. Prerequisite: CSE 312; CSE 331; CSE 332; recommended: CSE 427.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 428

CSE 431 Introduction to Theory of Computation (3)
Models of computation, computable and noncomputable functions, space and time complexity, tractable and intractable functions. Prerequisite: CSE 312.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 431

CSE 440 Introduction to HCI: User Interface Design, Prototyping, and Evaluation (5)
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) theory and techniques. Methods for designing, prototyping, and evaluating user interfaces to computing applications. Human capabilities, interface technology, interface design methods, and interface evaluation tools and techniques. Prerequisite: CSE 332.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 440

CSE 441 Advanced HCI: Advanced User Interface Design, Prototyping, and Evaluation (5)
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) theory and techniques. Advanced methods for designing, prototyping, and evaluating user interfaces to computing applications. Novel interface technology, advanced interface design methods, and prototyping tools. Prerequisite: CSE 440.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 441

CSE 444 Database Systems Internals (4)
The relational data model and the SQL query language. Conceptual modeling: entity/relationships, normal forms. XML, XPath, and XQuery. Transactions: recovery and concurrency control. Implementation of a database system. A medium sized project using a rational database backend. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 344.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 444

CSE 446 Machine Learning (4)
Methods for designing systems that learn from data and improve with experience. Supervised learning and predictive modeling: decision trees, rule induction, nearest neighbors, Bayesian methods, neural networks, support vector machines, and model ensembles. Unsupervised learning and clustering. Prerequisite: CSE 332; either STAT 390, STAT 391, or CSE 312.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 446

CSE 450 Animation Production Seminar (1)
Open to all students who have an interest in digital animation. Reviews and analyzes films, animated feature films, and television commercials. Emphasizes the technical and aesthetic basics of animation production in industry studio environments.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 450

CSE 451 Introduction to Operating Systems (4)
Principles of operating systems. Process management, memory management, auxiliary storage management, resource allocation. No credit to students who have completed CSE 410 or E E 474. Prerequisite: CSE 351; CSE 332; CSE 333.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 451

CSE 452 Introduction to Distributed Systems (4)
Covers abstractions and implementation techniques in the construction of distributed systems, including cloud computing, distributed storage systems, and distributed caches. Prerequisite: CSE 451.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 452

CSE 454 Advanced Internet and Web Services (5)
Design of Internet search engines, including spider architecture, inverted indices, frequency rankings, latent semantic indexing, hyperlink analysis, and refinement interfaces. Construction of scalable and secure web services. Datamining webserver logs to provide personalized and user-targeted services. Large project. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 351; either CSE 331 or CSE 352; recommended: completion of all required 300-level and several 400-level CSE courses.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 454

CSE 455 Computer Vision (4)
Introduction to image analysis and interpreting the 3D world from image data. Topics may include segmentation, motion estimation, image mosaics, 3D-shape reconstruction, object recognition, and image retrieval. Prerequisite: CSE 333; CSE 332; recommended: MATH 308; STAT 391.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 455

CSE 456 Story Design for Computer Animation (4)
Animation principles and production for story development and design. Design, development, and production of several storyreels, which are a tool for the pre-production of animated features and shorts. Student use authoring tools to present finished work.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 456

CSE 457 Computer Graphics (4)
Introduction to computer image synthesis, modeling, and animation. Topics may include visual perception, displays and framebuffers, image processing, affine and projective transformations, hierarchical modeling, hidden surface elimination, shading, ray-tracing, anti-aliasing, texture mapping, curves, surfaces, particle systems, dynamics, character animation, and animation principles. Prerequisite: CSE 333; CSE 332; recommended: CSE 312; MATH 308.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 457

CSE 458 Computer Animation (5)
Introduction to basic principles of computer generated animation. Focus on the modeling and lighting of animated characters. Students from art, CSE, and music team up on projects to be built on commercially-available modeling and lighting packages. Prerequisite: CSE 457; recommended: instructor permission. 
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 458

CSE 459 Pre-Production for Collaborative Animation (5)
Pre-production of collaboratively designed animated shorts. In-depth analysis of classical and computer generated works. Character design and pre-planning, model sheets, character rigging, storyreel and animatics, character motion, design for multiple characters, and principles of animation as applied to character motion and effects. Prerequisite: CSE 458.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 459

CSE 460 Animation Capstone (5)
Apply the knowledge gained in previous animation courses to produce a short animated film. Topics include scene planning, digital cinematography, creature and hard surface modeling, animatics and basics of character animation, and rendering techniques. Prerequisite: CSE 458, CSE 459.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 460

CSE 461 Introduction to Computer-Communication Networks (4)
Computer network architectures, protocol layers, network programming. Transmission media, encoding systems, switching, multiple access arbitration. Network routing, congestion control, flow control. Transport protocols, real-time, multicast, network security. Prerequisite: either CSE 326 or CSE 332; either CSE 303 or CSE 333.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 461

CSE 464 Advanced Topics in Digital Animation (1-5, max. 10)
Students design individual animated works for professional quality demo reels. 2- and 3-D animatics, special effects design, advanced character animation techniques, 3-D paint techniques and integration, short design, sequence planning, non-photorealistic rendering options, interactive animation for pre-planning, and advanced production techniques and strategies. Recommended: CSE 458.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 464

CSE 466 Software for Embedded Systems (4)
Software issues in the design of embedded systems. Microcontroller architectures and peripherals, embedded operating systems and device drivers, compilers and debuggers, timer and interrupt systems, interfacing of devices, communications and networking. Emphasis on practical application of development platforms. Prerequisite: CSE 352; CSE 333.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 466

CSE 467 Advanced Digital Design (4)
Advanced techniques in the design of digital systems. Hardware description languages, combinational and sequential logic synthesis and optimization methods, partitioning, mapping to regular structures. Emphasis on reconfigurable logic as an implementation medium. Memory system design. Digital communication including serial/parallel and synchronous/asynchronous methods. Prerequisite: CSE 352; CSE 332.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 467

CSE 471 Computer Design and Organization (4)
CPU instruction addressing models, CPU structure and functions, computer arithmetic and logic unit, register transfer level design, hardware and microprogram control, memory hierarchy design and organization, I/O and system components interconnection. Laboratory project involves design and simulation of an instruction set processor. Prerequisite: CSE 352.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 471

CSE 472 Introduction to Computational Linguistics (5) VLPA/NW E. BENDER
Introduction to computational approaches to modeling language, for linguistic research and practical applications, including analyses at different levels of linguistic structure and symbolic as well as statistical approaches. Prerequisite: either LING 200 or LING 400; either LING 461 or CSE 311. Offered: jointly with LING 472.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 472

CSE 473 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (3)
Principal ideas and developments in artificial intelligence: Problem solving and search, game playing, knowledge representation and reasoning, uncertainty, machine learning, natural language processing. Not open for credit to students who have completed CSE 415. Prerequisite: CSE 332; recommended: CSE 312; either STAT 390, or STAT 391.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 473

CSE 477 Digital System Design (5)
Capstone design experience. Prototype a substantial project mixing hardware, software, and communication components. Focuses on use of embedded processors and programmable logic in digital system design, case studies, and emerging components and platforms. Provides a complete experience in embedded system design and management. Prerequisite: CSE 451; CSE 466; CSE 467.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 477

CSE 481 Capstone Software Design (5, max. 15)
Students work in teams to design and implement a software project involving multiple areas of the CSE curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the development process itself, rather than on the product. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 351; either CSE 331 or CSE 352; recommended: completion of required 300-level and several 400-level CSE courses; instructor permission.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 481

CSE 484 Computer Security (4)
Foundations of modern computer security, including software security, operating system security, network security, applied cryptography, human factors, authentication, anonymity, and web security. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 351.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 484

CSE 486 Introduction to Synthetic Biology (3)
Studies mathematical modeling of transcription, translation, regulation, and metabolism in cell; computer aided design methods for synthetic biology; implementation of information processing, Boolean logic and feedback control laws with genetic regulatory networks; modularity, impedance matching and isolation in biochemical circuits; and parameter estimation methods. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 307, AMATH 351, or CSE 311 and MATH 308 or AMATH 352. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 423/E E 423; A.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 486

CSE 487 Advanced Systems and Synthetic Biology (3)
Covers advanced concepts in system and synthetic biology. Includes kinetics, modeling, stoichiometry, control theory, metabolic systems, signaling, and motifs. All topics are set against problems in synthetic biology. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 401, BIOEN 423, E E 423, or CSE 486. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 424/E E 424; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 487

CSE 488 Laboratory Methods in Synthetic Biology (4)
Designs and builds transgenic bacterial using promoters and genes taken from a variety of organisms. Uses construction techniques including recombination, gene synthesis, and gene extraction. Evaluates designs using sequencing, fluorescence assays, enzyme activity assays, and single cell studies using time-lapse microscopy. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 423, E E 423, or CSE 486; either CHEM 142, CHEM 144, or CHEM 145. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 425/E E 425; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 488

CSE 490 Special Topics in Computer Science and Engineering (1-5, max. 15)
Lectures, discussions, and possibly labs on topics of current interest in computer science and engineering not covered by other CSE undergraduate courses.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 490

CSE 495 Project Practicum ([1-5]-, max. 5)
Available in special situations for computer science majors to compete, under instructor guidance, a substantial computing project that deepens one's knowledge and experience in the field. Projects may involve a group of students.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 495

CSE 497 Undergraduate Research Seminar (1)
Students prepare and give a public talk on their faculty-sponsored research projects.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 497

CSE 498 Senior Project ([1-9]-, max. 9)
A report (and perhaps demonstration) describing a development, survey, or small research project in computer science or an application to another field. Objectives: (1) integrating material from several courses, (2) introducing the professional literature, (3) gaining experience in writing a technical document, and (4) showing evidence of independent work. Work normally extends over more than one quarter, for a maximum of 6 credits for CSE 498; 9 credits are required for CSE 498H.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 498

CSE 499 Reading and Research (1-24, max. 24)
Available in special situations for advanced computer science majors to do reading and research in field, subject to approval of undergraduate adviser and CSE faculty member. Free elective, but does not replace core course or computer science elective. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 499

CSE 501 Programming Language Analysis and Implementation (4)
Design and implementation of compilers and run-time systems for imperative, object-oriented, and functional languages. Intra- and interprocedural analyses and optimizations. Prerequisite: CSE 341; recommended: CSE 401.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 501

CSE 503 Software Engineering (4)
Specification, implementation, and testing of large, multiperson, software systems. Topics include abstraction, information hiding, software development environments, and formal specifications.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 503

CSE 504 Advanced Topics in Software Engineering (4)
Topics vary but may include software design and evolution, formal methods, requirements specifications, software and system safety, reverse engineering, real-time software, metrics and measurement, programming environments, and verification and validation.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 504

CSE 505 Principles of Programming Languages (4)
Design and formal semantics of modern programming languages, includes functional and object-oriented languages. Prerequisite: CSE 341.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 505

CSE 506 Advanced Topics in Programming Languages (4)
May include functional, object-oriented, parallel, and logic programming languages; semantics for languages of these kinds; type declaration, inference, and checking (including polymorphic types); implementation issues, such as compilation, lazy evaluation, combinators, parallelism, various optimization techniques. Implementation project required. Prerequisite: CSE 501 which may be taken concurrently, and CSE 505.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 506

CSE 507 Computer-Aided Reasoning for Software (4)
Covers theory, implementation, and applications of automated reasoning techniques, such as satisfiability solving, theorem proving, model checking, and abstract interpretation. Topics include concepts from mathematical logic and applications of automated reasoning to the design, construction, and analysis of software.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 507

CSE 510 Advanced Topics in Human-Computer Interaction (4)
Content varies, including interface issues for networks, embedded systems, education applications, safety and critical systems, graphics and virtual reality, databases, and computer-supported cooperative work.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 510

CSE 512 Data Visualization (4)
Covers techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations based on principles from graphic design, visual art, perceptual psychology, and cognitive science. Topics include data and image models; visual encoding; graphical perception; color; animation; interaction techniques; graph layout; and automated design. Lectures, reading, and project.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 512

CSE 515 Statistical Methods in Computer Science (4)
Introduction to the probabilistic and statistical techniques used in modern computer systems. Graphical models, probabilistic inference, statistical learning, sequential models, decision theory. Prerequisite: either CSE 312,STAT 341, STAT 391 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 515

CSE 517 Natural Language Processing (4)
Overview of modern approaches for natural language processing. Topics include language models, text, classification, tagging, parsing, machine translation, semantic, and discourse analysis.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 517

CSE 519 Current Research in Computer Science (1, max. 18)
Weekly presentations on current research activities by members of the department. Only computer science graduate students may register, although others are encouraged to attend. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 519

CSE 520 Computer Science Colloquium (1, max. 18)
Weekly public presentations on topics of current interest by visiting computer scientists. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 520

CSE 521 Design and Analysis of Algorithms I (4)
Principles of design of efficient algorithms: recursion, divide and conquer, balancing, dynamic programming, greedy method, network flow, linear programming. Correctness and analysis of algorithms. NP-completeness. Prerequisite: either CSE 332 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 521

CSE 522 Design and Analysis of Algorithms II (4)
Analysis of algorithms more sophisticated than those treated in CSE 521. Content varies and may include such topics as algebraic algorithms, combinational algorithms, techniques for proving lower bounds on complexity, and algorithms for special computing devices such as networks or formulas. Prerequisite: CSE 521.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 522

CSE 523 Computational Geometry (4)
Algorithms for discrete computational geometry. Geometric computation, range searching, convex hulls, proximity, Vornoi diagrams, intersection. Application areas include VLSI design and computer graphics. Prerequisite: CSE 521; recommended: either CSE 457 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 523

CSE 524 Parallel Algorithms (4)
Design and analysis of parallel algorithms: fundamental parallel algorithms for sorting, arithmetic, matrix and graph problems, and additional selected topics. Emphasis on general techniques and approaches used for developing fast and efficient parallel algorithms and on limitations to their efficacy. Prerequisite: CSE 521.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 524

CSE 525 Randomized Algorithms and Probabilistic Analysis (4)
Examines algorithmic techniques: random selection, random sampling, backwards analysis, algebraic methods, Monte Carlo methods, and randomized rounding; random graphs; the probabilistic method; Markov chains and random walks; and analysis tools: random variables, moments and deviations, Chernoff bounds, martingales, and balls in bins. Prerequisite: either CSE 521 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 525

CSE 527 Computational Biology (4)
Introduces computational methods for understanding biological systems at the molecular level. Problem areas such as mapping and sequencing, sequence analysis, structure prediction, phylogenic inference, regulatory analysis. Techniques such as dynamic programming, Markov models, expectation-maximization, local search.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 527

CSE 528 Computational Neuroscience (3)
Introduction to computational methods for understanding nervous systems and the principles governing their operation. Topics include representation of information by spiking neurons, information processing in neural circuits, and algorithms for adaptation and learning. Prerequisite: elementary calculus, linear algebra, and statistics, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with NEURO 528.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 528

CSE 529 Neural Control of Movement: A Computational Perspective (3)
Systematic overview of sensorimotor function on multiple levels of analysis, with emphasis on the phenomenology amenable to computational modeling. Topics include musculoskeletal mechanics, neural networks, optimal control and Bayesian inference, learning and adaptation, internal models, and neural coding and decoding. Prerequisite: vector calculus, linear algebra, MATLAB, or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with AMATH 533.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 529

CSE 531 Computational Complexity I (4)
Deterministic and nondeterministic time and space complexity, complexity classes, and complete problems. Time and space hierarchies. Alternation and the polynomial-time hierarchy. Circuit complexity. Probabilistic computation. Exponential complexity lower bounds. Interactive proofs. Prerequisite: either CSE 311 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 531

CSE 532 Computational Complexity II (4)
Advanced computational complexity including several of the following: circuit complexity lower bounds, #p and counting classes, probabilistically-checkable proofs, de-randomization, logical characteristics of complexity, communication complexity, time-space tradeoffs, complexity of data structures. Recommended: CSE 531.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 532

CSE 533 Advanced Topics in Complexity Theory (4)
An in-depth study of advanced topics in computational complexity.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 533

CSE 544 Principles of Database Systems (4)
Data models and query languages (SQL, datalog, OQL). Relational databases, enforcement of integrity constraints. Object-oriented databases and object-relational databases. Principles of data storage and indexing. Query-execution methods and query optimization algorithms. Static analysis of queries and rewriting of queries using views. Data integration. Data mining. Principles of transaction processing.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 544

CSE 546 Machine Learning (4)
Explores methods for designing systems that learn from data and improve with experience. Supervised learning and predictive modeling; decision trees, rule induction, nearest neighbors, Bayesian methods, neural networks, support vector machines, and model ensembles. Unsupervised learning and clustering. Prerequisite: either CSE 312, STAT 341, STAT 391 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 546

CSE 547 Machine Learning for Big Data (4) Fox, Guestrin
Covers machine learning and statistical techniques for analyzing datasets of massive size and dimensionality. Representations include regularized linear models, graphical models, matrix factorization, sparsity, clustering, and latent factor models. Algorithms include sketching, random projections, hashing, fast nearest-neighbors, large-scale online learning, and parallel learning (Map-Reduce, GraphLab). Prerequisite: either STAT 535 or CSE 546. Offered: jointly with STAT 548; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 547

CSE 548 Computer Systems Architecture (4)
Notations for computer systems. Processor design (single chip, look-ahead, pipelined, data flow). Memory hierarchy organization and management (virtual memory and caches). Microprogramming. I/O processing. Multiprocessors (SIMD and MIMD). Prerequisite: CSE 451.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 548

CSE 549 High-Performance Computer Architectures (4)
Algorithm design, software techniques, computer organizations for high-performance computing systems. Selected topics from: VLSI complexity for parallel algorithms, compiling techniques for parallel and vector machines, large MIMD machines, interconnection networks, reconfigurable systems, memory hierarchies in multiprocessors, algorithmically specialized processors, data flow architectures. Prerequisite: CSE 548 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 549

CSE 550 Computer Systems (4)
Explores computer system design, implementation, and evaluation. Covers principles, techniques, and examples related to the construction of computer systems, including concepts that span network systems, operating systems, web servers, parallel computing, and databases. Prerequisite: CSE 451.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 550

CSE 551 Operating Systems (4)
Operating system design and construction techniques. Concurrent programming, operating system kernels, correctness, deadlock, protection, transaction processing, design methodologies, comparative structure of different kinds of operating systems, and other topics. Prerequisite: CSE 451.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 551

CSE 552 Distributed and Parallel Systems (4)
Principles, techniques, and examples related to the design, implementation, and analysis of distributed and parallel computer systems. Prerequisite: CSE 551.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 552

CSE 553 Real-Time Systems (4)
Design and construction of software for real-time computer systems. Software architectures. Requirements and specification methods. Scheduling algorithms and timing analysis. Real-time operating systems. Real-time programming languages. Selected case studies. Prerequisite: CSE 451.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 553

CSE 557 Computer Graphics (4)
Introduction to image synthesis and computer modeling, emphasizing the underlying theory required for undertaking computer graphics research. Topics include color theory, image processing, affine and projective geometry, hidden-surface determination, photorealistic image synthesis, advanced curve and surface design, dynamics, realistic character animation. Prerequisite: solid knowledge of linear algebra.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 557

CSE 558 Special Topics in Computer Graphics (4)
Advanced topics in computer graphics not treated in CSE 557. Topics vary from year to year but typically include advanced aspects of image synthesis, animation, and 3D photography. Prerequisite: CSE 557 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 558

CSE 561 Computer Communication and Networks (4)
Fundamentals of data transmission: coding, message formats, and protocols. Organization of computer networks. Examples of network implementations. Prerequisite: either CSE 451 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 561

CSE 564 Computer Security and Privacy (4)
Examines the fundamentals of computer security including: human factors; attack detection, measurements, and models; cryptography and communications security; system design and implementation; and side channels.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 564

CSE 567 Principles of Digital Systems Design (4)
Principles of logic design, combinational and sequential circuits, minimization techniques, structured design methods, CMOS technology, complementary and ratioed gates, delay estimation and performance analysis, arithmetic circuits, memories, clocking methodologies, synthesis and simulation tools, VLSI processor architecture. Prerequisite: basic knowledge of logic design.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 567

CSE 568 Introduction to VLSI Systems (4)
Introduction to CMOS technology and circuit design; combinational logic-design alternatives; register-design and system-clocking methodologies; datapath and subsystem design; VLSI system-design methodologies; CAD tools for synthesis, layout, simulation, and validation; design of a complex VLSI chip. Prerequisite: either CSE 567 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 568

CSE 571 AI-based Mobile Robotics (4)
Overview of mobile robot control and sensing. Behavior-based control, world modeling, localization, navigation, and planning Probabilistic sensor interpretation, Bayers filters, particle filters. Projects: Program real robots to perform navigation tasks. Prerequisite: either CSE 473 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 571

CSE 573 Artificial Intelligence I (4)
Intensive introduction to artificial intelligence: Problem solving and search, game playing, knowledge representation and reasoning, uncertainty, machine learning, natural language processing. Prerequisite: either CSE 421 or equivalent; exposure to logic, probability, and statistics.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 573

CSE 574 Artificial Intelligence II (4)
Advanced topics in artificial intelligence. Subjects include planning, natural language understanding, qualitative physics, machine learning, and formal models of time and action. Students are required to do projects. Prerequisite: CSE 573.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 574

CSE 576 Computer Vision (3)
Principles and methods for interpreting the three-dimensional world from images. Topics include feature detection, image segmentation, motion estimation, image mosaics, 3D-shape reconstruction, object recognition, and image retrieval. Prerequisite: solid knowledge of linear algebra; good programming skills. Offered: jointly with E E 576.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 576

CSE 577 Special Topics in Computer Vision (3)
Topics vary and may include vision for graphics, probabilistic vision and learning, medical imaging, content-based image and video retrieval, robot vision, or 3D object recognition. Prerequisite: CSE 576/E E 576. Offered: jointly with E E 577.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 577

CSE 579 Intelligent Control through Learning and Optimization (3)
Design or near-optimal controllers for complex dynamical systems, using analytical techniques, machine learning, and optimization. Topics from deterministic and stochastic optimal control, reinforcement learning and dynamic programming, numerical optimization in the context of control, and robotics. Prerequisite: vector calculus; linear algebra; MATLAB. Offered: jointly with AMATH 579.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 579

CSE 586 Introduction to Synthetic Biology (3)
Studies mathematical modeling of transcription, translation, regulation, and metabolism in cell; computer aided design methods for synthetic biology; implementation of information processing, Boolean logic and feedback control laws with genetic regulatory networks; modularity, impedance matching and isolation in biochemical circuits; and parameter estimation methods. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 307, AMATH 351, or CSE 311 and MATH 308 or AMATH 352. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 523/E E 523.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 586

CSE 587 Advanced Systems and Synthetic Biology (3)
Covers advanced concepts in system and synthetic biology. Includes kinetics, modeling, stoichiometry, control theory, metabolic systems, signaling, and motifs. All topics are set against problems in synthetic biology. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 523, E E 523, or CSE 586. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 524/E E 524; W.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 587

CSE 590 Research Seminar (*, max. 50)
Several offerings each quarter, on topics of current interest.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 590

CSE 591 Group Projects in Computer Science (1-3, max. 25)
Focuses on specialized topics and research activities in computer science.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 591

CSE 599 Special Topics in Computer Science (1-5, max. 30)
Studies of emerging areas and specialized topics in computer science.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 599

CSE 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 600

CSE 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 700

CSE 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE 800

CSE M 544 Database Systems (4)
Relational data model and SQL query language. Conceptual modeling; normal forms; XML. Transactions: recovery and concurrency control. Implementation of a database system. Application project using a relational database system. Study of database research papers. May not be taken for credit if student has taken CSE 444. Prerequisite: CSE 332; CSE 344.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE M 544

CSE M 552 Introduction to Distributed Systems (4)
Covers abstractions and implementation techniques in the construction of distributed systems, including cloud computing, distributed storage systems, and distributed caches. Prerequisite: CSE 451
View course details in MyPlan: CSE M 552

CSE M 584 Computer Security (4)
Explores foundations and new directions in computer security and privacy, including: risk analysis, system security, applied cryptography, human-computer interaction, design and implementation issues, anonymity, web security, and side channels. Studies security and privacy research papers. Prerequisite: CSE 351; either CSE 451 or CSE 461.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE M 584

CSE P 501 Compiler Construction (4)
Principles and practice of building efficient implementations of modern programming languages. Lexical, syntactic, and semantic analysis of programs. Intermediate program representations. Intra- and interprocedural analysis and optimization. Run-time system techniques. Related programming environment facilities such as source-level debuggers and profilers.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 501

CSE P 503 Principles of Software Engineering (4)
Study of major developments in software engineering over the past three decades. Topics may include design (information hiding, layering, open implementations), requirements specification (informal and formal approaches), quality assurance (testing, verification and analysis, inspections), reverse and re-engineering (tools, models, approaches).
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 503

CSE P 504 Advanced Topics in Software Systems (4)
Topics include software architecture, software tools, programming language analysis, type systems, formal reasoning, and other pertinent topics in software engineering and programming languages research.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 504

CSE P 505 Programming Languages (4)
A study of non-imperative programming paradigms such as functional, object-oriented, logic, and constraint programming. Programming language semantics and type theory.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 505

CSE P 510 Human Computer Interaction (4)
Topics in human-computer interaction, including tools and skills for user interface design, user interface software architecture, rapid prototyping and iterative design, safety and critical systems, evaluation techniques, and computer supported cooperative work.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 510

CSE P 517 Natural Language Processing (4)
Provides an overview of modern approaches for natural language processing. Topics include language models, text classification, tagging, parsing, machine translation, semantics, and discourse analysis.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 517

CSE P 521 Applied Algorithms (4)
Principles of design of efficient algorithms with emphasis on algorithms with real world applications. Examples drawn from computational geometry, biology, scientific computation, image processing, combinatorial optimization, cryptography, and operations research.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 521

CSE P 524 Parallel Computation (4)
Survey of parallel computing including the processing modes of pipelining, data parallelism, thread parallelism, and task parallelism; algorithmic implications of memory models; shared memory and message passing; hardware implementations; bandwidth and latency; synchronization, consistency, interprocessor communication; programming issues including implicit and explicit parallelism, locality, portability.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 524

CSE P 531 Computability and Complexity Theory (4)
Survey of the theory of computation including Turing Machines, Churche's Thesis, computability, incompleteness, undecidability, complexity classes, problem reductions, Cook's theorem, NP-completeness, randomized computation, cryptography, parallel computation, and space complexity. Some emphasis placed on historical and philosophical aspects of the theory of computation.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 531

CSE P 544 Database Management System (4)
Introduction to the principles of database management systems. Topics include database system architecture, data models, theory of database design, query optimization, concurrency control, crash recovery, and storage strategies.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 544

CSE P 545 Transaction Processing (4)
Technology supporting reliable large-scale distributed computing, including transaction programming models, TP monitors, transactional communications, persistent queuing, software fault tolerance, concurrency control and recovery algorithms, distributed transactions, two-phase commit, data replication.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 545

CSE P 546 Data Mining (4)
Methods for identifying valid, novel, useful, and understandable patterns in data. Induction of predictive models from data: classification, regression, probability estimation. Discovery of clusters and association rules.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 546

CSE P 548 Computer Architecture (4)
Architecture of the single-chip microprocessor: instruction set design and processor implementation (pipelining, multiple issue, speculative execution). Memory hierarchy: on-chip and off-chip caches, TLBs and their management, virtual memory from the hardware viewpoint. I/O devices and control: buses, disks, and RAIDs.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 548

CSE P 551 Computer Operating Systems (4)
A study of developments in operating systems from the 1960s to the present. Topics include operating system structure, protection, virtual memory, communication mechanisms, concurrency, lightweight threads, object-oriented systems, distributed systems, and transaction support in operating systems.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 551

CSE P 552 Distributed Systems (4)
Principles, techniques, and examples related to the design, implementation, and analysis of distributed computer systems.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 552

CSE P 557 Current Trends in Computer Graphics (4)
Introduction to computer image synthesis, modeling, and animation emphasizing the state-of-the-art algorithm applications. Topics may include visual perception, image processing, geometric transformations, hierarchical modeling, hidden-surface elimination, shading, ray-tracing, anti-aliasing, texture mapping, curves, surfaces, particle systems, dynamics, realistic character animation, and traditional animation principles.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 557

CSE P 561 Network Systems (4)
Current choices and challenges in network systems. Fundamental concepts combined with emphasis on evaluation of design/operations alternatives. Topics include alternative link, network, and transport-layer technologies, topologies, routing, congestion control multimedia, Ipv6, aTM v. IP, network management and policy issues.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 561

CSE P 564 Computer Security and Privacy (4)
Examines the fundamental of computer security including: human factors; attack detection, measurements, and models; cryptography and communications security; system design and implementation; and side channels.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 564

CSE P 567 Design and Implementation of Digital Systems (4)
Overview of current implementation technologies for digital systems including custom integrated circuits, field-programmable logic, and embedded processors. Systems components such as buses and communications structures, interfaces, memory architectures, embedded systems, and application-specific devices. Focus on the design of large systems using modern CAD tools.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 567

CSE P 573 Applications of Artificial Intelligence (4)
Introduction to the use of Artificial Intelligence tools and techniques in industrial and company settings. Topics include foundations (search, knowledge representation) and tools such as expert systems, natural language interfaces, and machine learning techniques.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 573

CSE P 576 Computer Vision (4)
Provides an overview of computer vision, emphasizing the middle ground between image processing and artificial intelligence. Image formation, pre-attentive image processing, boundary and region representations, and case studies of vision architectures.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 576

CSE P 590 Special Topics in Computer Science (1-4, max. 20)
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 590

CSE P 595 Software Entrepreneurship (4)
Provides an overview of the major elements of entrepreneurial activity in software, including market identification and analysis, evaluation and planning of the business, financing, typical operating and administrative problems, and alternatives for growth or sale.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 595

CSE P 596 Business Basics Computer Science Professionals (4)
Business principles relevant to the software industry in four areas: competitive strategy, finance, accounting, and human resources. Organized as a series of case studies and lectures. Progresses from an emphasis on tools to a more high-level look at competitive dynamics in high-tech industries.
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 596

CSE P 600 Independent Study or Research ([1-4]-)
View course details in MyPlan: CSE P 600

E E 135 The Digital World of Multimedia (4) NW
Introduces signal processing concepts behind multimedia creation, storage, and communication. Includes digitizing, decomposing, and modifying sounds and images; coding information for compression, errors, and security; and basics of network communication. Team-oriented labwork involves creating digital sounds and images using MATLAB, and experiments with streaming media technology.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 135

E E 205 Introduction to Signal Conditioning (4) QSR
Introduces analog circuits interfacing sensors to digital systems. /includes connection, attenuation, amplification, sampling, filtering, termination, controls, Kirchhoff's Laws, sources, resistors, op amps, capacitors, inductors, PSice, and MATLAB. Intended for non-EE majors. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 or MATH 136; PHYS 122. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 205

E E 215 Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering (4) NW
Introduction to electrical engineering. Basic circuit and systems concepts. Mathematical models of components. Kirchhoff's laws. Resistors, sources, capacitors, inductors, and operational amplifiers. Solution of first and second order linear differential equations associated with basic circuit forms. Prerequisite: either MATH 126 and MATH 307, which may be taken concurrently or MATH 136; PHYS 122. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 215

E E 233 Circuit Theory (5)
Electric circuit theory. Analysis of circuits with sinusoidal signals. Phasors, system functions, and complex frequency. Frequency response. Computer analysis of electrical circuits. Power and energy. Two port network theory. Laboratory in basic electrical engineering topics. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 215. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 233

E E 235 Continuous Time Linear Systems (5)
Introduction to continuous time signal analysis. Basic signals including impulses, pulses, and unit steps. Periodic signals. Convolution of signals. Fourier series and transforms in discrete and continuous time. Computer laboratory. Prerequisite: either MATH 136, MATH 307, or AMATH 351, any of which may be taken concurrently; PHYS 122; CSE 142, which may be taken concurrently. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 235

E E 271 Digital Circuits and Systems (5)
Overview of digital computer systems. Digital logic, Boolean algebra, combinational and sequential circuits and logic design, programmable logic devices, and the design and operation of digital computers, including ALU, memory, and I/O. Weekly laboratories. Prerequisite: CSE 142. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 271

E E 299 Introductory Topics in Electrical Engineering (1-5, max. 10) NW
New and experimental approaches to basic electrical engineering. May include design and construction projects.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 299

E E 331 Devices and Circuits I (5)
Physics, characteristics, applications, analysis, and design of circuits using semiconductor diodes and field-effect transistors with an emphasis on large-signal behavior and digital logic circuits. Classroom concepts are reinforced through laboratory experiments and design exercises. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 233. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 331

E E 332 Devices and Circuits II (5)
Characteristics of bipolar transistors, large- and small- signal models for bipolar and field effect transistors, linear circuit applications, including low and high frequency analysis of differential amplifiers, current sources, gain stages and output stages, internal circuitry of op-amps, op-amp configurations, op-amp stability and compensation. Weekly laboratory. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 331. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 332

E E 341 Discrete Time Linear Systems (5)
Discrete time signals and systems, impulse response, convolution, Z-transforms, discrete time Fourier analysis. Computer laboratory. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 235. Offered: WSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 341

E E 351 Energy Systems (5)
Develops understanding of modern energy systems through theory and analysis of the system and its components. Discussions of generation, transmission, and utilization are complemented by environmental and energy resources topics as well as electromechanical conversion, power electronics, electric safety, renewable energy, and electricity blackouts. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 233. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 351

E E 361 Applied Electromagnetics (5)
Introductory electromagnetic field theory and Maxwell's equations in integral and differential forms; uniform plane waves in linear media; boundary conditions and reflection and transmission of waves; guided waves; transmission lines and Smith chart; electrostatics. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 233; MATH 324; PHYS 123. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 361

E E 371 Design of Digital Circuits and Systems (5)
Provides a theoretical background in, and practical experience with, tools, and techniques for modeling complex digital systems with the Verilog hardware description language, maintaining signal integrity, managing power consumption, and ensuring robust intra- and inter-system communication. Prerequisite: either E E 205 or E E 215; E E 271.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 371

E E 393 Advanced Technical Writing in Electrical Engineering (4)
Develops formal technical writing skills for engineering students. Includes organization and structure of papers and reports, clear and concise technical language, choice of appropriate terminology, and an overview of common grammatical errors. Covers implementation of figures, equations, and literature citations, with specific recommendations for electrical engineers. Prerequisite: HCDE 231. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 393

E E 398 Introduction to Professional Issues (1)
Covers topics of interest to students planning their educational and professional path, including salaries, the value of advanced degrees, societal expectations of engineering professionals, the corporate enterprise, ethical dilemmas, patents and trade secrets, outsourcing, and the global market. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 398

E E 399 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering (1-5, max. 10)
New and experimental approaches to current electrical engineering problems. May include design and construction projects.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 399

E E 400 Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering (1-5, max. 10)
Contemporary topics at the advanced undergraduate elective level. Faculty presents advanced elective topics not included in the established curriculum.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 400

E E 401 Engineering Design in Large Teams (4)
Engineering design process, including project management, team formation, working with technical literature, concept development (e.g., brainstorming, morphological analysis, biomimetics, theory of inventive problem solving), intellectual property, high-tech ventures. Prerequisite: E E 215.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 401

E E 402 Engineering Design in Large Teams: Robotics II (5)
Engineering design process applied to robot design. Involves project management, mentoring, marketing, and multi-disciplinary collaboration. The team designs, prototypes, manufactures, assembles, texts, modifies, troubleshoots, and learns to operate a system that competes in an international design contest. Prerequisite: E E 215; E E 401.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 402

E E 406 Engineering Design for K-12 Outreach (3)
Design process targeted toward development of relevant activities for K-12 audiences in such areas of science and engineering. Instruction in basic design process, design specification combined with an overview of relevant cognitive/social development in K-12. Prerequisite: either E E 271, E E 331, E E 341, E E 351 or E E 361.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 406

E E 415 Computer-Aided System Analysis and Design (3)
Concepts, principles, and techniques concerned with the design, testing, and application of general-purpose problem-oriented computer programs for analyzing large-scale systems.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 415

E E 416 Random Signals for Communications and Signal Processing (4)
Probability and random processes in communications. Random variables, distributions, and expectation. Statistical filter design for detection and estimation. Prerequisite: E E 341; either STAT 390 or IND E 315. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 416

E E 417 Modern Wireless Communications (4)
Introduction to wireless networks as an application of basic communication theorems. Examines modulation techniques for digital communications, signal space, optimum receiver design, error performance, error control coding for high reliability, mulitpath fading and its effects, RF link budget analysis, WiFi and Wimax systems. Prerequisite: E E 341; either IND E 315, MATH 390, or STAT 390. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 417

E E 418 Network Security and Cryptography (3)
Fundamental principles of cryptography and its application to network and communication security. An introduction to the fundamental tools in cryptography and the protocols that enable its application to network and communication security. Prerequisite: MATH 308; either MATH 390, STAT 390, or IND E 315. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 418

E E 420 Design in Communications (4)
Design projects in communications. Frequent projects solved by student teams. Reports and presentations. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 417 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 420

E E 423 Introduction to Synthetic Biology (3)
Studies mathematical modeling of transcription, translation, regulation, and metabolism in cell; computer aided design methods for synthetic biology; implementation of information processing, Boolean logic and feedback control laws with genetic regulatory networks; modularity, impedance matching and isolation in biochemical circuits; and parameter estimation methods. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 307, AMATH 351, or CSE 311 and MATH 308 or AMATH 352. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 423/CSE 486; A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 423

E E 424 Advanced Systems and Synthetic Biology (3)
Covers advanced concepts in system and synthetic biology. Includes kinetics, modeling, stoichiometry, control theory, metabolic systems, signaling, and motifs. All topics are set against problems in synthetic biology. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 401, BIOEN 423, E E 423, or CSE 486. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 424/CSE 487; W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 424

E E 425 Laboratory Methods in Synthetic Biology (4)
Designs and builds transgenic bacterial using promoters and genes taken from a variety of organisms. Uses construction techniques including recombination, gene synthesis, and gene extraction. Evaluates designs using sequencing, fluorescence assays, enzyme activity assays, and single cell studies using time-lapse microscopy. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 423, E E 423, or CSE 486; either CHEM 142, CHEM 144, or CHEM 145. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 425/CSE 488; W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 425

E E 433 Analog Circuit Design (5)
Design of analog circuits and systems applying modern integrated circuit technology: operational amplifiers, differential amplifiers, active filters, voltage references and regulators. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 332. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 433

E E 436 Medical Instrumentation (4)
Introductory course in the application of instrumentation to medicine. Topics include transducers, signal-conditioning amplifiers, electrodes and electrochemistry, ultrasound systems, electrical safety, and the design of clinical electronics. Laboratory included. For upper-division and first-year graduate students preparing for careers in bioengineering - both research and industrial. Prerequisite: E E 332. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 436

E E 440 Introduction to Digital Imaging Systems (4)
Image representation and standards, visual perception and color spaces, spatial domain image filtering and enhancement, image restoration, image transforms, image and video coding, image geometrical transformation and camera modeling. Prerequisite: E E 341. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 440

E E 442 Digital Signals and Filtering (3)
Methods and techniques for digital signal processing. Review of sampling theorems, A/D and D/A converters. Demodulation by quadrature sampling. Z-transform methods, system functions, linear shift-invariant systems, difference equations. Signal flow graphs for digital networks, canonical forms. Design of digital filters, practical considerations, IIR and FIR filters. Digital Fourier transforms and FFT techniques. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 341. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 442

E E 443 Design and Application of Digital Signal Processing (5)
Application of learned theories/algorithms and available computer technologies to modern image and speech processing problems. Two-dimensional signals and systems. Image transform, enhancement, restoration, coding. Characteristics of speech signals, linear predictive coding (LPC) of speech, pitch detection, and LPC speech synthesis, speech recognition, hardware designs for signal processing. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 442. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 443

E E 447 Control System Analysis I (4)
Linear Servomechanism theory and design principles. Pole-zero analysis, stability of feedback systems by root locus and real-frequency response methods. Design methods of Bode and Nichols. Introduction to advanced topics in automatic control theory, state variable methods. Prerequisite: E E 233; E E 235; MATH 308. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 447

E E 448 Systems, Controls, and Robotics Capstone (4-)
In-depth control engineering design experience in small design teams. Includes project planning and management, reporting, and technical communication. Student teams design, implement, test, and report on their project results, Includes lectures on selected topics, e.g., project management, intellectual property, and some control engineering topics. Prerequisite: E E 447. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 448

E E 449 Systems, Controls, and Robotics Capstone (-4)
In-depth control engineering design experience in small design teams. Includes project planning and management, reporting, and technical communication. Student teams design, implement, test, and report on their project results, Includes lectures on selected topics, e.g., project management, intellectual property, and some control engineering topics. Prerequisite: E E 448. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 449

E E 451 Wind Energy (4)
Covers the operation and modeling of wind energy, wind statistics, wind generators and converters, wind energy systems, challenges to wind energy development, impacts of wind energy on the power grid, and existing and potential solutions to wind energy integration. Prerequisite: E E 351. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 451

E E 452 Power Electronics Design (5)
Electronic conversion and control of electrical power. Includes semiconductor switching devices, power converter circuits, design of magnetics, and control of power converters. Also ac/ac, ac/dc, and dc/dc power converters; circuit simulation; extensive laboratory work; a four-week power converter design project. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 331; 1.0 in E E 351. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 452

E E 453 Electric Drives (5)
Elements of drive systems, speed-torque characteristics of electric motors and industrial loads, solid-state converter. Starting and braking methods of loaded motors. Speed control of electric motors. Solid-state drives. Transient analysis of loaded motors. Special forms of individual- and multimotor drives. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 452. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 453

E E 454 Power System Analysis (4)
Introduction to methods of analyzing power systems. Includes symmetrical components, calculation of line parameters, representation of transmission lines and power components, and power flow control. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 351. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 454

E E 455 Power System Dynamics and Protection (4)
Analysis of symmetrical and unsymmetrical power systems' networks, fault analysis, and stability studies. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 351. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 455

E E 456 Computer-Aided Design in Power Systems (4)
Design-oriented course in power system engineering. Students are assigned a project concerning system operation and planning, steady-state and dynamic behaviors of power systems, or distribution systems. Each involves formulation of design criteria, development of approach, application of existing software. Prerequisite: either 1.0 in E E 454 or 1.0 in E E 455. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 456

E E 457 Electric Energy Distribution Systems (4)
Introduction to electric utility distribution systems. Primary and secondary network analysis and design, distribution substation problems, distribution transformers, capacitor application, overcurrent and overvoltage protection. System planning and reliability. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 351. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 457

E E 461 Introduction to Computer-Communication Networks (4)
Computer network architectures and protocols. OSI Layers and performance analysis. Transmission media, switching, multiple access arbitration. Network routing, congestion control, flow control. Transport protocols, real-time, multicast, network security. Prerequisite: CSE 143; either MATH 390/STAT 390, STAT 391, or IND E 315. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 461

E E 465 Fiber Optics, Devices, and Applications (4)
Wave propagation in optical waveguiding structures, signal distortion, coupling of modes, modulation, sources and detectors, fabrication and measurement methods, communication and sensor systems. Prerequisite: E E 331; E E 361.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 465

E E 467 Antennas: Analysis and Design (4)
Fundamentals of antennas, analysis, synthesis, and computer-aided design, and applications in communications, remote sensing, and radars. Radiation pattern, directivity, impedance, wire antennas, arrays, numerical methods for analysis, horn antennas, microstrip antennas, and reflector antennas. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 361. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 467

E E 471 Computer Design and Organization (5)
Introduction to computer architecture, algorithms, hardware design for various computer subsystems, CPU control unit design, hardwired and microprogrammed control, memory organization, cache design, virtual memory, I/O organization, and I/O hardware design. Prerequisite: either E E 271 or CSE 370; CSE 143. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 471

E E 472 Microcomputer Systems (5)
Concepts of multi-level machines and computer systems organization. Utilizing microprocessors, digital computer studied at assembly; also, high-language levels with emphasis on concepts of central processor architecture, memory organization, input/output, and interrupts. Assembly language programming concepts applied to solution of various laboratory problems including I/O programming. Prerequisite: CSE 143. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 472

E E 473 Linear Integrated Circuits (5)
Design of linear integrated circuits applying modern MOS and BJT integrated circuit technologies: single-stage amplifiers; current-mirror DC bias and active load circuits; stability and frequency compensation of single-stage and two-stage operational amplifiers; output stages; current and voltage reference circuits. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 332. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 473

E E 476 Digital Integrated Circuit Design (5)
Comprehensive view of digital integrated circuit design. Topics to be covered include the design of inverters, static logic circuits, switch logic, and synchronous logic. Students design, simulate, and layout a complete digital IC using modern computer-aided design tools. Prerequisite: either E E 205 or E E 215; E E 271. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 476

E E 477 VLSI II (5)
Provides a fairly deep understanding of how IC-based memory and datapath blocks are designed using static and dynamic CMOS technologies. Gives students extensive experience with industry-standard computer-aided design tools, including Cadence (Virtuoso, DRC, LVS) and Avanti (Hspice). Credit not allowed for both E E 477 and E E 525. Prerequisite: E E 331; E E 476. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 477

E E 478 Design of Computer Subsystems (5)
Design of digital computer subsystems and systems, using SSI, MSI, and LSI digital components. Combinational logic, sequential logic, memory hardware designs, I/O hardware and interface design, system design steps, high-speed digital circuit design, noise reduction techniques, and hardware description language. One four-hour laboratory each week and design project. Prerequisite: E E 271; E E 472. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 478

E E 480 Microwave Engineering I (4)
Analysis and design of transmission lines and matching circuits. Lossy transmission lines. Mode structures in metallic and dielectric waveguides. Microwave resonators and magnetic devices. Smith chart and matching techniques. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 361. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 480

E E 481 Microwave Electronic Design (4)
Design of microwave circuits using S-parameter techniques. Measurement techniques, CAD of microwave systems. Includes design, fabrication, and evaluation of a microwave amplifier. Prerequisite: 1.0 in E E 332; 1.0 in E E 361. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 481

E E 482 Semiconductor Devices (4)
Fundamentals of semiconductor theory: carrier diffusion and drift; concept of direct and indirect energy materials, effective mass of mobile carriers; device physics: homo- and heterojunctions, operating principles of bipolar, junction, and MOS field-effect transistors. Prerequisite: E E 331; E E 361. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 482

E E 484 Sensors and Sensor Systems (4)
Introduction to optical and solid-state chemical and physical sensors. Topics include transduction mechanisms, design parameters, fabrication methods and applications. Prerequisite: E E 331. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 484

E E 485 Introduction to Photonics (4)
Introduction to optical principles and phenomena. Topics include electromagnetic theory of light, interference, diffraction, polarization, photon optics, laser principles, Gaussian beam optics, semiconductor optics, semiconductor photonic devices. Prerequisite: E E 361 or PHYS 123. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 485

E E 486 Fundamentals of Integrated Circuit Technology (3)
Processing physics, chemistry, and technology, including evaporation, sputtering, epitaxial growth, diffusion, ion implantation, laser annealing, oxidation, chemical vapor deposition, photoresists. Design considerations for bipolar and MOS devices, materials and process characterization. Future trends. Prerequisite: either both E E 331 and E E 361 or MSE 351. Offered: jointly with MSE 486; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 486

E E 488 Photonics Design Capstone (4)
Design of optical and optoelectronic devices using fundamental principles of photonics. Recent advances in contemporary research. Construction of microscopes or spectrometers. Involves a major design experience. Prerequisite: E E 485.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 488

E E 490 Reading and Research (1-5, max. 25)
Reading and research in the field under supervision of an E E faculty member. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 490

E E 491 Undergraduate Seminar (1, max. 2)
Weekly seminars on current topics in electrical engineering. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 491

E E 499 Undergraduate Research and Special Projects (2-5, max. 10)
Undergraduate research or design project carried out under the supervision of a faculty sponsor.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 499

E E 500 Graduate Seminar (1, max. 9)
Weekly seminars on current topics in electrical engineering. More than one section may be offered in a given quarter. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 500

E E 501 Radar Remote Sensing (4)
Introduces radar remote sensing. Covers the fundamentals of radar systems, monostatic and bistatic topologies, radar equation, range-time diagram; ambiguity function, pulse compression, elementary estimation and detection theory, spectrum estimation for underspread and overspread targets; interferometry, source imaging; and Time Difference of Arrival, Aperture Synthesis (SAR and ISAR).
View course details in MyPlan: E E 501

E E 502 Introduction to Microelectro Mechanical Systems (4)
Theoretical and practical aspects in design, analysis, and fabrication of MEMS devices. Fabrication processes, including bulk and surface micromachining. MEMS design and layout. MEMS CAD tools. Mechanical and electrical design. Applications such as micro sensors and actuators, or chemical and thermal transducers, recent advances. Offered: jointly with M E 504/MSE 504.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 502

E E 503 Modeling of MEMS (4)
Explores microelectro mechanical systems (MEMS) including lumped modeling, conjugate power variables, electrostatic and magnetic actuators, linear transducers, linear system dynamics, design optimization, and thermal analysis. Numerical modeling topics include electro (quasi) static, mechanical, electro mechanical, magneto (quasi) static, and fluidic phenomena; parametric analysis, visualization of multi-dimensional solutions; and verification of validity of results.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 503

E E 505 Probability and Random Processes (4)
Foundations for the engineering analysis of random processes: set theoretic fundamentals, basic axioms of probability models, conditional probabilities and independence, discrete and continuous random variables, multiple random variables, sequences of random variables, limit theorems, models of stochastic processes, noise, stationarity and ergodicity, Gaussian processes, power spectral densities. Prerequisite: graduate standing and understanding of probability at the level of E E 416.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 505

E E 506 Fundamentals of Wireless Communication (4)
Reviews fundamentals of wireless communications including signal and noise theory, modulation techniques, fading channels, error analysis, synchronization, and coding. Prerequisite: E E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 506

E E 507 Communication Theory II (3)
Review of stochastic processes. Communication system models. Channel noise and capacity. Optimum detection, modulation, and coding, convolutional coders and decoders. Typical channels, random and fading channels. Waveform communication, optimum filters. Prerequisite: E E 506.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 507

E E 508 Stochastic Processes in Engineering (3)
Non-measure theoretic introduction to stochastic processes. Topics include Poisson processes, renewal processes, Markov and semi-Markov processes, Brownian motion, and martingales, with applications to problems in queuing, supply chain management, signal processing, control, and communications. Prerequisite: E E 505. Offered: jointly with IND E 508.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 508

E E 510 Mathematical Foundations of Systems Theory (4)
Mathematical foundations for system theory presented from an engineering viewpoint. Includes set theory; functions, inverse functions; metric spaces; finite dimensional linear spaces; linear operators on finite dimensional spaces; projections on Hilbert spaces. Applications to engineering systems stressed. Offered: jointly with A A 510/CHEM E 510/M E 510.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 510

E E 511 Introduction to Statistical Learning (4)
Covers classification and estimation of vector observations, including both parametric and nonparametric approaches. Includes classification with likelihood functions and general discriminant functions, density estimation, supervised and unsupervised learning, feature reduction, model selection, and performance estimation. Prerequisite: either E E 505 or CSE 515.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 511

E E 512 Graphical Models in Pattern Recognition (4)
Bayesian networks, Markov random fields, factor graphs, Markov properties, standard models as graphical models, graph theory (e.g., moralization and triangulation), probabilistic inference (including pearl's belief propagation, Hugin, and Shafer-Shenoy), junction threes, dynamic Bayesian networks (including hidden Markov models), learning new models, models in practice. Prerequisite: E E 508; E E 511.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 512

E E 514 Information Theory I (4)
Includes entropy, mutual information, Shannon's source coding theorem, data compression to entropy limit, method of types, Huffman coding, Kraft inequality, arithmetic coding, Kolmogorov complexity, communication at channel capacity (channel coding), coding theory, introduction to modern statistical coding techniques, differential entropy, and Gaussian channels. Prerequisite: E E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 514

E E 515 Information Theory II (4)
Includes advanced modern statistical coding techniques (statistical coding), advanced codes and graphs, source coding with errors (rate distortion), alternating minimization principles, channel coding with errors, network information theory, multiple description coding, and information theory in other areas including pattern recognition, bio-informatics, natural language processing, and computer science. Prerequisite: E E 514.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 515

E E 516 Computer Speech Processing (4)
Introduction to automatic speech processing. Overview of human speech production and perception. Fundamental theory in speech coding, synthesis and reproduction, as well as system design methodologies. Advanced topics include speaker and language identification and adaptation. Prerequisite: E E 505; E E 518.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 516

E E 517 Statistical Language Processing (4)
Introduction to major issues in natural language processing and human language technology, with emphasis on statistical approaches. Addresses topics in statistical parsing and tagging, dialogue systems, information extraction, and machine translation. Prerequisite: E E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 517

E E 518 Digital Signal Processing (4)
Digital representation of analog signals. Frequency domain and Z-transforms of digital signals and systems design of digital systems; IIR and FIR filter design techniques, fast Fourier transform algorithms. Sources of error in digital systems. Analysis of noise in digital systems. Prerequisite: knowledge of Fourier analysis techniques.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 518

E E 519 Stochastic Analysis of Data From Physical Systems (4)
Computer systems for acquisition and processing of stochastic signals. Calculation of typical descriptors of such random processes as correlation functions, spectral densities, probability densities. Interpretation of statistical measurements made on a variety of physical systems (e.g., electrical, mechanical, acoustic, nuclear). Lecture plus laboratory. Prerequisite: E E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 519

E E 520 Spectral Analysis of Time Series (4)
Estimation of spectral densities for single and multiple time series. Nonparametric estimation of spectral density, cross-spectral density, and coherency for stationary time series, real and complex spectrum techniques. Bispectrum. Digital filtering techniques. Aliasing, prewhitening. Choice of lag windows and data windows. Use of the fast Fourier transform. The parametric autoregressive spectral density estimate for single and multiple stationary time series. Spectral analysis of nonstationary random processes and for randomly sampled processes. Techniques of robust spectral analysis. Prerequisite: one of STAT 342, STAT 390, STAT 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, or IND E 315. Offered: jointly with STAT 520.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 520

E E 521 Quantum Mechanics for Engineers (4)
Covers the basic theory of quantum mechanics in the context of modern examples of technological importance involving 1D, 2D, and 3D nanomaterials. Develops a qualitative and quantitative understanding of the principles of quantization, band structure, density of states, and Fermi's golden rule (optical absorption, electron-impurity/phonon scattering). Prerequisite: MATH 307 or AMATH 351.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 521

E E 523 Introduction to Synthetic Biology (3)
Studies mathematical modeling of transcription, translation, regulation, and metabolism in cell; computer aided design methods for synthetic biology; implementation of information processing, Boolean logic and feedback control laws with genetic regulatory networks; modularity, impedance matching and isolation in biochemical circuits; and parameter estimation methods. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 307, AMATH 351, or CSE 311 and MATH 308 or AMATH 352. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 523/CSE 586.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 523

E E 524 Advanced Systems and Synthetic Biology (3)
Covers advanced concepts in system and synthetic biology. Includes kinetics, modeling, stoichiometry, control theory, metabolic systems, signaling, and motifs. All topics are set against problems in synthetic biology. Prerequisite: either BIOEN 523, E E 523, or CSE 586. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 524/CSE 587; W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 524

E E 525 VLSI II (5)
Analyzes how IC-based memory and datapath blocks are designed using static and dynamic CMOS technologies. Gives students extensive experience with industry-standard computer-aided design tools, including Cadence (Virtuoso, DRC, LVS) and Avanti (Hspice). Credit not allowed for both E E 477 and E E 525. Prerequisite: E E 476.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 525

E E 526 VLSI III (4)
Ultra-high speed digital logical families based on output prediction logic; high-speed division; input and output pad design; state-of the-art latch and flip-flop design; clock distribution, including PLLs and DLLs; noise considerations in high-speed digital IC design. Prerequisite: E E 477 or E E 525.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 526

E E 527 Microfabrication (4)
Principles and techniques for the fabrication of microelectronics devices and integrated circuits. Includes clean room laboratory practices and chemical safety, photolithography, wet and dry etching, oxidation and diffusion, metallization and dielectric deposition, compressed gas systems, vacuum systems, thermal processing systems, plasma systems, and metrology. Extensive laboratory with limited enrollment.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 527

E E 528 Physics and Modeling f VLSI Fabrication (4)
Physics of VLSI fabrication, emphasizing processing modeling and simulation. CMOS process, sequences, point defects and diffusion, ion implantation and annealing, film growth kinetics, deposition and etching, advanced photolithography. Process interactions and process integration. Extensive use of process simulation software. Prerequisite: either E E 486/MSE 467, E E 520/M E 504/MSE 504, or E E 527. Offered: jointly with MSE 528.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 528

E E 529 Semiconductor Optoelectronics (4)
Covers optical processes in semiconductors; optical waveguide theory; junction theory; LEDs; lasers photodetectors; photovoltaics; and optical modulators and switches. Prerequisite: E E 485.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 529

E E 530 Wavelets: Data Analysis, Algorithms, and Theory (3)
Review of spectral analysis. Theory of continuous and discrete wavelets. Multiresolution analysis. Computation of discrete wavelet transform. Time-scale analysis. Wavelet packets. Statistical properties of wavelet signal extraction and smoothers. Estimation of wavelet variance. Prerequisite: some Fourier theory and linear algebra; MATH 390/STAT 390, ECON 481 or STAT 481, STAT 509/CS&SS 509/ECON 580, STAT 513, or IND E 315. Offered: jointly with STAT 530; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 530

E E 531 Semiconductor Devices and Device Simulation (4)
Physical principles in semiconductor devices. Generation, recombination, p-n junctions, MOS, metal-semiconductor and other interface structures. Carrier transport at low and high level injection levels. Device simulation used to demonstrate physical principles and basic device operation. Project using device simulation. Prerequisite: E E 482.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 531

E E 533 Photodetectors and Photodetection (4)
Includes both the device physics and signal processing aspects of photodetection. Photodiodes, photoconductors, photomultipliers, and solar cells. Noise, signal-to-noise ratios, and imaging considerations. Prerequisite: E E 482.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 533

E E 534 Power Electronics (4)
Detailed study of DC-to-AC inverters, pulse-width modulated and resonant DC-to-DC converter topologies; drive and protection circuits for efficient switching of semiconductor devices. Includes extensive computer-aided circuit simulation and power supply control.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 534

E E 536 Design of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems (4)
Design of analog VLSI: specifications, design, simulation, layout. Covering CMOS and Bi CMOS technologies. Prerequisite: E E 433.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 536

E E 537 Computation Methods for Circuit Analysis and Simulation (3)
Introduction to numerical algorithms and computer-aided techniques for the simulation of electronic circuits. Theoretical and practical aspects of important analyses: large-signal nonlinear DC, small-signal AC, nonlinear transient, and large-signal steady-state. Simulation concepts applied to the modeling and characterization of various electronic devices.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 537

E E 538 Topics in Electronic Circuit Design (1-5, max. 16)
Topics of current interest in electronic circuit and system design. Course content varies from year to year, based on current professional interests of the faculty member in charge.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 538

E E 539 Advanced Topics in Solid-State Electronics (1-5, max. 16)
Lectures or discussions of topics of current interest in the field of solid-state electronics for advanced graduate students having adequate preparation in solid-state theory. Subject matter may vary according to the interests of students and faculty.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 539

E E 540 VLSI Testing (4)
VLSI testing and design-for-test techniques, covering digital systems, mixed analog-digital systems, integrated sensor systems, and radio-frequency systems. Projects include test algorithm design, testing of fabricated circuits, and parametric testing of state-of-the-art industry circuits. Prerequisite: either E E 477 or E E 525.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 540

E E 541 Automatic Layout of Integrated Circuits (4)
Examines the algorithms behind the following commonly used physical design automation tools: floorplanning, partitioning, placement, routing, compaction, and verification. Prerequisite: either E E 271or CSE 370; CSE 143.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 541

E E 542 Advanced Embedded Systems Design (5)
Studies advanced embedded system design principles and practices. Emphasizes formal design methodologies such as hardware-software co-design, investigates techniques for performance optimization, and examines distributed embedded systems. Prerequisite: E E 478.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 542

E E 543 Models of Robot Manipulation (4)
Mathematical models of arbitrary articulated robotic (or biological) arms and their application to realistic arms and tasks, including the homogeneous coordinate model of positioning tasks, the forward and inverse kinematic models, the Jacobian Matrix, and the recursive Newton-Euler dynamic model. Prerequisite: linear algebra.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 543

E E 544 Advanced Robot Manipulation (4)
Continuation of the analysis of robot manipulation, considering kinematic redundancy, control of robot manipulators in contact with the environment, teleoperation, and grasping with multi-fingered hands. Students perform a project and critique a research paper in the area of the project. Prerequisite: E E 543.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 544

E E 545 Autonomous Multi-Robot Systems (4)
Design-oriented course in autonomous multi-robot systems. Wireless peer communication protocols, multi-robot control methodologies and computational issues. Laboratory exercises include design, construction, and testing of multiple autonomous mobile robots, which compete as a team at the end of the term. Prerequisite: either E E 462 or E E 463.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 545

E E 546 Advanced Topics in Control System Theory (1-5, max. 16)
Topics of current interest in control system theory for advanced graduate students with adequate preparation in linear and nonlinear system theory. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered when adequate enrollment develops prior to close of advance registration.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 546

E E 547 Linear Systems Theory (4)
Linearity, linearization, finite dimensionality, time-varying vs. time-invariant linear systems, interconnection of linear systems, functional/structural descriptions of linear systems, system zeros and invertibility, linear system stability, system norms, state transition, matrix exponentials, controllability and observability, realization theory. Recommended: either A A 447, E E 447, or M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 547/M E 547.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 547

E E 548 Linear Multivariable Control (3)
Introduction to MIMO systems, successive single loop design comparison, Lyapunov stability theorem, full state feedback controller design, observer design, LQR problem statement, design, stability analysis, and tracking design. LQG design, separation principle, stability robustness. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 548/M E 548.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 548

E E 549 Estimation and System Identification (3)
Fundamentals of state estimation for linear and nonlinear systems. Discrete and continuous systems. Probability and stochastic systems theory. Models with noise. Kalman-Bucy filters, extended Kalman filters, recursive estimation. Numerical issues in filter design and implementation. Prerequisite: either A A 547, E E 547, or M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 549/M E 549.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 549

E E 550 Nonlinear Optimal Control (3)
Calculus of variations for dynamical systems, definition of the dynamic optimization problem, constraints and Lagrange multipliers, the Pontryagin Maximum Principle, necessary conditions for optimality, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation, singular arc problems, computational techniques for solution of the necessary conditions. Recommended: A A 548/E E 548. Offered: jointly with A A 550/M E 550.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 550

E E 551 Wind Energy (4)
Covers the operation and modeling of wind energy, wind statistics, wind generators and converters, wind energy systems, challenges to wind energy development, impacts of wind energy on the power grid, and existing and potential solutions to wind energy integration. Prerequisite: E E 351.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 551

E E 552 Power Systems Dynamics and Control (4)
Advanced computer modeling and analysis of power systems. Application of modern systems and control theories. Prerequisite: E E 351 and E E 455.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 552

E E 553 Power System Economics (4)
Economic structure of power systems. Problem formulation, optimization methods and programming for economic analysis of power system operation and planning. Economic dispatch, load forecasting, unit commitment, interchange, planning and reliability analysis. Provides background to pursue advanced work in planning and operation.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 553

E E 554 Large Electric Energy Systems Analysis (4)
Deals with problems whose solution depends upon the inversion of sparse matrices that occur in the planning and operational studies of large interconnected energy systems. Application studies include system model development, state estimation, and load flow. Prerequisite: E E 456.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 554

E E 555 Fundamentals of Intelligent Systems (4)
Fundamentals and applications of intelligent systems and biologically inspired algorithms such as neural networks, evolutionary computations, swarm optimization and fuzzy systems. Solving complex engineering applications with a combination of these technologies as well as with more traditional approaches such as statistical system theories.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 555

E E 556 Anaylzing the Power Grid (4)
Discusses the models of the various components of an electricity grid and how they are combined into a set of equations that can be used to analyze the grid under normal, steady state conditions, as well as to calculate fault currents and assess its transient stability.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 556

E E 557 Dynamics of Controlled Systems (4)
Explores control techniques for high precision motion control. Covers sate variable feedback of linear and nonlinear, multivariable systems in depth. Uses physical system modeling, graphical analysis, and numerical analysis to describe system performance. Uses simulation mini-projects to emphasize the dynamics of controlled systems and their performance.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 557

E E 558 Substation and Distribution Automation (4)
Examines how smart grid technologies affect substation and distribution operations and how history, customer expectations, and state and federal policies have shaped the existing infrastructure. Studies the capabilities of various emerging technologies to assess how they are able to solve existing issues.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 558

E E 559 Special Topics in Electrical Energy Systems (1-5, max. 16)
Topics of current interest in electrical power and energy devices and systems. Content varies from year to year, based on current professional interests of faculty member in charge.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 559

E E 560 Advanced Electric Machines and Drives (4)
Fundamentals of electric machines and drives, including brush DC, brushless DC, PM synchronous, induction machines, inverter topologies, and control techniques. Evaluation of torque production and control in machines with electronic drives (motor controllers).
View course details in MyPlan: E E 560

E E 562 Artificial Intelligence for Engineers (3)
Covers main areas of artificial intelligence (AI) without need for extensive prerequisites. Programming languages for AI; problem solving; representations; control strategies; searching strategies; predicate calculus; rule-based deduction; goal-directed planning; knowledge-based systems. Prerequisite: CSE 373.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 562

E E 565 Computer-Communication Networks I (4)
Network architectures and protocols; layered model; reliable transmission protocols at the data control layer; Transmission Control Protocols (TCP); routing algorithms; performance modeling, and analysis of packet-switched networks. Multi-access. Projects involving routing and multi-access principles. Prerequisite: E E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 565

E E 566 Computer-Communication Networks II (3)
Local area, metropolitan area, satellite, and packet radio networks; routing algorithms for wide area networks; optimal design of packet-switched networks; congestion and flow control; fast packet switching; gigabit networks. Prerequisite: E E 565.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 566

E E 567 Mobile Radio Networks (4)
Wireless communication networks, including digital broadcasting, wireless LAN, wireless access networks and ultra wide band (UWB); OFDM modem design; dirty-paper coding; MAC and RLP; TCP/UDP over wireless; multi-radio networks; cross-layer protocol optimization; radio network planning. Prerequisite: E E 506; E E 565.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 567

E E 568 Image Processing Computer Systems (4)
All components of digital image-processing computer systems. Two-dimensional filtering and optimal filter design as well as basic image processing operations. Selected advanced image processing topics. Individual student project. Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 568

E E 570 Manifolds and Geometry for Systems and Control (3)
Introduction to fundamentals of calculus on manifolds and group theory with applications in robotics and control theory. Topics include: manifolds, tangent spaces and bundles, Lie groups and algebras, coordinate vs. coordinate-free representations. Applications from physics, robotics, and control theory. Offered: jointly with A A 570/M E 570; W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 570

E E 571 High Frequency Circuits and Antennas: Computation of Fields and Waves (4)
Planar microstrip structures are high frequency circuits and antennas used in communication, aerospace and computer industries. Examines the computation of fields and waves in such structures. How to calculate circuit parameters and radiation characteristics. Structures studied include microstrip lines, coupled lines, antennas, resonators, and discontinuities. Prerequisite: either E E 482 or E E 572.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 571

E E 572 Electromagnetic Theory and Applications I (4)
Electromagnetic waves in layered media; complex waves, leaky and slow waves, waves in periodic structures, optical fibers, ionosphere and other guiding structures; transients and dispersive media; waveguides and cavities; beam waves; eigenfunctions and eigenvalues.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 572

E E 573 Electromagnetic Computations and Applications I (4)
Fundamentals of computational electromagnetics, method of moments, integral equations, basis functions, iterative methods, periodic structures and Green's Functions finite difference time domain method, Yee's lattice, absorbing boundary conditions, variational principles, and finite element method. Applications in antennas, waveguides, and scattering problems. Prerequisite: E E 572.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 573

E E 574 Electromagnetic Computations and Applications II (4)
Current topics in computational electromagnetics, fast multipole multilevel method, sparse matrix canonical grid method, wavelet based methods, recursive method, spectral time domain method. Applications in large scale problems such as array antennas, radar cross section, rough surface scattering, and dense media scattering, Prerequisite: E E 573.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 574

E E 575 Waves in Random Media (4)
Propagation and scattering of electromagnetic, optical, and acoustic waves in turbulence and random media, scattering from rough surfaces and randomly distributed particles. Atmospheric turbulence, fog, rain, smog, clear-air turbulence detection, remote sensing, terrain scattering, scattering from blood cells and tissues, scattering by ocean waves. Applications to atmospheric sciences, bioengineering, geoscience, ocean engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 575

E E 576 Computer Vision (3)
Principles and methods for interpreting the three-dimensional world from images. Topics include feature detection, image segmentation, motion estimation, image mosaics, 3D-shape reconstruction, object recognition, and image retrieval. Prerequisite: solid knowledge of linear algebra; good programming skills. Offered: jointly with CSE 576.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 576

E E 577 Special Topics in Computer Vision (3)
Topics vary and may include vision for graphics, probabilistic vision and learning, medical imaging, content-based image and video retrieval, robot vision, or 3D object recognition. Prerequisite: CSE 576/E E 576. Offered: jointly with CSE 577.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 577

E E 578 Optimization in System Sciences (3)
Covers convex sets, separation theorems, theorem of alternatives and their applications, convex analysis, convex functions, conjugation, subgradients, convex optimization, duality and applications, linear and semi-definite programming. Linear matrix inequalities, optimization algorithms, applications in system theory and control, bilinear, rank minimization, optimization software. Recommended: A A 547/M E 547/E E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 578/M E 578; W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 578

E E 579 Advanced Topics in Electromagnetics, Optics, and Acoustics (1-5, max. 16)
Topics of current interest in electromagnetics, optics, and acoustics. Content varies from year to year, based on current professional interests of faculty member in charge.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 579

E E 580 Geometric Methods for Non-Linear Control Systems (3)
Analysis and design of nonlinear control systems focusing on differential geometric methods. Topics include controllability, observability, feedback linearization, invariant distributions, and local coordinate transformations. Emphasis on systems evolving on Lie groups and linearly uncontrollable systems Prerequisite: A A 570/E E 570/M E 570. Offered: jointly with A A 580/M E 580; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 580

E E 581 Digital Control (3) Chizeck
Sampled-data systems, and z-transform. Frequency domain properties. Sampling D/A and A/D conversion. Controller design via discrete-time equivalents, direct methods, state feedback and observers. Quantization effects. LQR control and introduction to LQG optimal control. Prerequisite: E E 548/A A 548/ M E 548. Offered: jointly with A A 581/M E 581; W.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 581

E E 582 Introduction to Discrete Event Systems (3) Berg
Modeling DES with automata and Petri nets. Languages. State estimation and diagnostics. Control specifications. Feedback control. Dealing with uncontrollability and unobservability. Dealing with blocking. Timed automata and Petri nets. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/ M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 582/M E 582; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 582

E E 583 Nonlinear Control Systems (3)
Analysis of nonlinear systems and nonlinear control system design. Phase plane analysis. Lyapunov stability analysis. Describing functions. Feedback linearization. Introduction to variable structure control. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 583/M E 583.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 583

E E 585 System Identification and Adaptive Control (3)
Theory and methods of system identification and adaptive control. Identification of linear-in-parameter systems, using recursive LS and extended LS methods; model order selection. Indirect and direct adaptive control. Controller synthesis, transient and stability properties. Recommended: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 585/M E 585.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 585

E E 586 Digital Video Coding Systems (4)
Introduction to digital video coding algorithms and systems. Theoretical and practical aspects of important topics on digital video coding algorithms, motion estimation, video coding standards, systems issues, and visual communications.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 586

E E 587 Multimedia Compression and Networking (4)
Addresses four major components of multimedia: 1) data compression of multimedia (e.g., speech, audio, image, and video); 2) quality of service (QoS) issues for data transmission over IP; 3) multimedia streaming and conferencing applications; and 4) intellectual property management and protection (IPMP) of multimedia contents. Co-requisite: E E 518.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 587

E E 589 Advanced Topics in Sensors and Sensor Systems (3)
Topics of current interest in sensors and sensor systems.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 589

E E 590 Advanced Topics in Digital Computers (2-5, max. 16)
Lectures or discussions of topics of current interest in the field of digital systems. Subject matter may vary from year to year.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 590

E E 591 Robotics and Control Systems Colloquium (1, max. 30)
Colloquium on current topics in robotics and control systems analysis and design. Topics presented by invited speakers as well as on-campus speakers. Emphasis on the cross-disciplinary nature of robotics and control systems. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with A A 591/CHEM E 591/M E 591.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 591

E E 592 Electrical Engineering Research Survey (1, max. 2)
Weekly presentations on current research activities by members of the department. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 592

E E 593 Feedforward Control (3) Devasia
Design feedforward controllers for precision output tracking; inversion-based control of non-minimum-phase systems; effect of plant uncertainty on feedforward control; design of feedforward controllers for applications such as vertical take off and landing aircraft, flexible structures and piezo-actuators. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 593/M E 593; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 593

E E 594 Robust Control (3)
Basic foundations of linear analysis and control theory, model realization and reduction, balanced realization and truncation, stabilization problem, coprime factorizations, Youla parameterization, matrix inequalities, H-infinity and H2 control, KYP lemma, uncertain systems, robust H2, integral quadratic constraints, linear parameter varying synthesis, applications of robust control. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 594/M E 594; Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 594

E E 595 Advanced Topics in Communication Theory (1-5, max. 16)
Extension of E E 507, E E 508, E E 518, E E 519, E E 520. Material differs each year, covering such topics as: detection theory, decision theory, game theory, adaptive communication systems, nonlinear random processes.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 595

E E 596 Advanced Topics in Signal and Image Processing (2-5, max. 16)
Topics of current interest in signal and image processing. Content may vary from offering to offering.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 596

E E 597 Networked Dynamics Systems (3)
Provides an overview of graph-theoretic techniques that are instrumental for studying dynamic systems that coordinate their states over a signal-exchange network. Topics include network models, network properties, dynamics over networks, formation control, biological networks, observability, controllability, and performance measures over networks. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 597/M E 597.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 597

E E 599 Selected Topics in Electrical Engineering (1-5, max. 15)
Prerequisite: permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: E E 599

E E 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: E E 600

E E 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: E E 700

E E 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: E E 800

ENGR 100 Introduction to Engineering Design (5) I&S
Introduction to design and communication principles through engineering project approach, stressing teamwork, design process, specialties and tools of engineering, creative and analytical thinking, professionalism and ethics, social, economic and political context, open-ended problems. Grading based on quality of engineering projects and presentation of design through written, oral, and graphical communication. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 100

ENGR 101 Engineering Exploration (1-2, max. 3)
Presentations and discussions on topics of current interest in engineering. Explores various areas of engineering research, engineering disciplines, and the relevance to today's students. Topics vary by quarter.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 101

ENGR 102 Studying Engineering (1-3, max. 6)
Intensive seminar focusing on topics relating to the successful study of engineering. Topics include an introduction to the university culture, learning skills development, engagement with critical resources, and an introduction to engineering disciplines and professions. Topics vary by quarter. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 102

ENGR 197 Engineering Problem Solving (1, max. 12)
Lectures and problem sessions in mathematics, chemistry, and physics with engineering applications. Enrollment restricted to Minority Science, Engineering Program (MSEP), and Women in Science and Engineering (WiSE) students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 197

ENGR 199 Special Projects (1-3, max. 3)
Students propose problems to solve to an engineering faculty member. The problems may be selected from the student's own experiences and interests, from the interest of the faculty member, or from other sources such as faculty or graduate students doing research projects, or from personnel in the physical medicine area, occupational therapy, hospital, industry, or government. Corroboration by an engineering faculty member is required. Project suggestions are available. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 199

ENGR 202 Special Topics (1-5, max. 10)
Topics of current interest to engineering students. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 202

ENGR 320 Engineering Cooperative Education (1-10, max. 12)
Engineering practicum; includes integration of classroom theory with on-the-job training. Open only to students who have been admitted to the Engineering Cooperative Education Program. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 320

ENGR 321 Engineering Cooperative Education ([1-2]-, max. 16)
Engineering practicum; integration of classroom theory with on-the-job training. Periods of full-time work alternate with periods of full-time study. Open only to students who have been admitted to the Engineering Cooperative Education Program. Requires subsequent completion of ENGR 322 to obtain credit. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 321

ENGR 322 Engineering Cooperative Education Postwork Seminar (-0)
Reporting and evaluation of co-op work experience, and discussion of current topics in engineering. To be taken during the first quarter in school following each work session. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 322

ENGR 360 Introductory Acoustics (3) NW
Introduction to propagation of acoustical waves; emphasis on propagation of sound waves in air, but material is applicable to propagation of sound waves in liquids, including underwater acoustics, and to propagation of stress waves in solids. Includes a historical development of acoustics, terminology, and units employed. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 307; PHYS 123. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 360

ENGR 380 Design for Sustainability in the Developing World (2, max. 8) I&S Bolton
Introduction to issues in international sustainable development from an engineering perspective. Combines lectures on current approaches and potential pitfalls with work on group projects related to sustainable development efforts of Engineers Without Borders. Develops research and design skills using real life projects. Intended for students from all backgrounds. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 380

ENGR 401 Leadership Development to Promote Equity in Engineering Relationships (3) I&S, DIV
Engages engineering students' energy, creativity, social conscience, and on-the-ground perspectives in advancing diversity and inclusion in engineering. Students explore topics such as diversity in science and engineering, impact of unconscious bias, the role of allies, community engagement, and leadership in supporting all current and potential engineers. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 401

ENGR 498 Special Topics in Engineering (1-5, max. 6)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 498

ENGR 499 Special Projects in Engineering (1-3, max. 6)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 499

ENGR 598 Seminar Series in Engineering (1, max. 12)
Graduate seminar series on topics of interest to all engineering students.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 598

ENGR 601 Internship ([1-2]-, max. 24)
Engineering practicum; includes integration of classroom theory with on-the-job training for graduate students. Open only to students who have been admitted to the Engineering Cooperative Education Program. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: ENGR 601

HCDE 100 Introduction to Human Centered Design and Engineering (5)
Topics may include: virtual communities, human-computer interaction, web design, usability testing, visual design, and others. Explores course content through individual and group hands-on projects. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 100

HCDE 231 Introduction to Technical Communication (3)
Examines fundamentals of research and presenting technical information for various audiences and purposes. Individually and in teams, students learn to construct documents and presentations, following conventions of oral, written, and visual communication. Assignments are framed around ethical and sustainable engineering practices. Prerequisite: either C LIT 240, both ENGL 109 and ENGL 110, ENGL 111, ENGL 121, ENGL 131, ENGL 182, ENGL 197, ENGL 198, ENGL 199, or ENGL 281. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 231

HCDE 300 Foundations of Human Centered Design and Engineering (5)
Examines principles and practices of human centered design and engineering. Includes overview of conceptual problems in human centered design and engineering, issues related to communicating scientific and technical information to a variety of audiences, and human centered design approaches. Includes attention to social contexts and environments (legal, ethical, cultural). Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 300

HCDE 301 Written Communication in Human Centered Design and Engineering (5)
Reviews the writing process including analyzing audience and purpose, planning and designing communication, integrating graphics, mastering style and syntax in Standard American English, and using appropriate tone. Prerequisite: HCDE 231.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 301

HCDE 303 Project Management and Computer Supported Collaboration and Work (5)
Addresses how to understand and manage communication practices and projects in scientific and technical organizations. Topics include: system design, project design, supporting workflow, communication practices, information structures, and planning. Focuses on CMC and CSC principles and practices.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 303

HCDE 308 Visual Communication in Human Centered Design and Engineering (5) VLPA
Introduces principles of visual communication and design used in human centered design and engineering so that students gain a systematic understanding as they create visual communication components of print, interactive, and video media. Students develop this understanding through hands-on exercises, design critiques, discussions, lectures, and readings in a studio environment.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 308

HCDE 310 Interactive Systems Design and Technology (5)
Provides opportunities to identify and build interactive systems to solve problems in human centered design and engineering. Students specify, design, build, and justify design solutions in terms of user experience and technical design choices. Prerequisite: either CSE 140 or CSE 142. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 310

HCDE 313 Introduction to User Research (5)
Introduces user research methods, such as interviews, surveys, usability tests, content analysis, and focus groups. Reviews selecting an appropriate research method, how to conduct research and analyze results, conveying research data in the form of design requirements, and ethics.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 313

HCDE 318 Introduction to User-Centered Design (5)
Explores the user-centered design paradigm from a broad perspective, with an emphasis on the importance of developing and applying design processes and strategies. Students learn to think like a user-centered designer and carry out activities that are key to user-centered design.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 318

HCDE 321 Portfolio (2)
Covers recent trends in design and communication portfolios, as well as foundational considerations for portfolio development. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in HCDE 310; may not be repeated. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 321

HCDE 322 Organizational Teamwork (2)
Introduces students to teamwork and leadership competencies of particular significance to interdisciplinary, design-oriented, creative, and distributed work of human-centered design and engineering. Particular emphasis on competencies related to interpersonal interactions, group dynamics, and civic responsibility. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 322

HCDE 333 Advanced Technical Writing and Oral Presentation (4)
Emphasizes the principles of written and oral communication for the engineering workplace. Designs solutions to professional communication problems: technical reports, proposals, correspondence, resumes, and oral presentations. Focuses on needs assessment and designing solutions that call for effective selection and integration of verbal and visual components. For engineering majors. Prerequisite: HCDE 231. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 333

HCDE 407 Software User Assistance (5)
Concepts, skills, and industry practices for designing the full spectrum of information resources that users need to master complex interfaces. Includes interface text, embedded and standard help, manuals, wizards, tutorials, SDK documentations and troubleshooting (Knowledge Base) content, and the role of social media and user-generated content. Prerequisite: HCDE 310. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 407

HCDE 408 Public Documents: Proposals, EISs, Assessments (3)
Analyzing special documents of public character: proposals, EISs, questionnaires, technology assessments. Understanding socio-political milieu in which they are planned, organized, written; the specialized audiences (e.g., agencies with their missions, guidelines, constituencies; citizen groups; commercial interests) they serve. Documents, the decision-making process. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 408

HCDE 411 Information Visualization (5) VLPA/I&S
Introduces the design and presentation of digital information. Covers the use of graphics, animation, sound, and other modalities in presenting information to the user; understanding vision and perception; methods of presenting complex information to enhance comprehension and analysis; and the incorporation of visualization techniques into human-computer interfaces. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in HCDE 310; may not be repeated.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 411

HCDE 417 Usability Research Techniques (5)
Introduces usability research methods used in the product-development process; contextual inquiry, surveys and interviews, focus groups, user profiling, usability testing, cognitive walkthroughs, heuristics, and others. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in HCDE 313; may not be repeated. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 417

HCDE 418 User Experience Design (5)
Provides a project-based introduction to the user interface design process and is oriented toward practical methods for approaching a design problem. Focuses on developing conceptual designs based on user need. Prerequisite: HCDE 417. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 418

HCDE 419 Concepts in Human-Computer Interaction (5) I&S
Studies the social, cognitive, behavioral, and contextual aspects of information systems and informational dimensions of the human-computer interface, and other user-centered design concepts. Surveys research literature of human information behavior, as well as ethical standards. Prerequisite: HCDE 310. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 419

HCDE 421 Current Practices in Technical Communication (3)
Covers principles and practices of writing to communicate scientific and technical information to a variety of readers. Teaches how to write for the expert, general scientific and technical reader, manager, and general public.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 421

HCDE 422 Style in Technical Communication (3)
Covers principles and practices of writing publication-ready American English writing for global audiences. Teaches how to write for the expert, general scientific and technical reader, manager, and general public.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 422

HCDE 423 Introduction to Technical Editing (3)
Covers editorial practices and responsibilities in communication of scientific and technical information. Includes the editor's role as an editor of documents, a collaborator in document development, and a manager of publication projects and groups.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 423

HCDE 424 The Computer in Technical Communication (4)
Introduces popular tools used by TC professionals. Students examine the tools' functionality, the types of design activities supported, and techniques for designing effective solutions. Project-driven course project teaches students how to transform unformatted content, using these tools, into a polished set of documents in multiple formats.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 424

HCDE 426 Software User Assistance (3)
Covers how to write effective documentations for a variety of software users, from end-users to developers. Students produce a complete documentation set for a software product or service using the most appropriate delivery mechanisms for the content and the audience. Prerequisite: HCDE 310.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 426

HCDE 427 Production Editing (4)
Covers the editorial role in the preparation of text and visual materials, both print and online, for production. Teaches the editor's responsibilities and prerogatives as they relate to those of other professionals in the production phase of the publication's field.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 427

HCDE 435 Introduction to Content Management (3)
Principles and practices of building, managing. and using content management systems in the workplace. Examines both the intricacies of collaborative workflow technologies and the organizational contexts that surround them.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 435

HCDE 437 Web Design and Web Publishing (5) VLPA/I&S
Design principles and skills including navigation, functional design, visual design, and content development. Includes the ongoing process of Web publishing. Addresses societal issues pertaining to the web and Internet. Students build a website and plan for ongoing web publishing. Prerequisite: HCDE 310. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 437

HCDE 438 Web Technologies (5)
Markup languages and styles, JavaScript, Flash, Photoshop, and the fundamentals of digital sound and video. Includes an introduction to server-side technologies. Students expand their existing design skills to encompass the use of these web technologies. Prerequisite: HCDE 310; HCDE 437. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 438

HCDE 455 User Interface Design (4) Furness
Design oriented to cover fundamentals of user interface design; models on human computer interaction, software psychology, input devices, usability, cognitive and perceptual aspects of human-computer interaction, advanced interface, and research methodologies are discussed. Offered: jointly with IND E 455; A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 455

HCDE 461 Japanese for Technical and Business Professions I (5) VLPA Kato
Strengthens knowledge of grammar and vocabulary and applies this to basic technical business communication situations. Covers cultural concepts underlying these situations. Reviews authentic materials on technology-related topics. Teaches skills to analyze sentence structure for accurate interpretation. Laboratory work required. Placement test before admission. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 461

HCDE 462 Japanese for Technical and Business Professions II (5) VLPA Kato
Covers the functional/situational conversation skills necessary in technical and business communication situations, plus the cultural concepts underlying these situations. Reviews skills (such as prediction) for more effective reading and improves skills for analyzing complex sentence structure. Additional grammar, vocabulary, and kanji are introduced. Laboratory work required. Prerequisite: HCDE 461. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 462

HCDE 463 Japanese for Technical and Business Professions III (5) VLPA Kato
Covers the functional/situational conversation skills necessary in technical and business communication situations, plus the cultural concepts underlying these situations. Further improves skills introduced in previous courses and reviews skills for understanding inter-sentence structure. Additional grammar, vocabulary, and kanji introduced. Laboratory work required. Prerequisite: HCDE 462. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 463

HCDE 492 Capstone Planning (2)
Helps students define capstone topics, form project teams, and develop initial concepts, deliverables, and schedules for the HCDE capstone project. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 492

HCDE 493 Senior Capstone (5)
Capstone design experience. Integrates knowledge and skills acquired during major program into one paper or project. Prerequisite: minimum grade of 2.0 in HCDE 417; may not be repeated.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 493

HCDE 495 Professional Practice (3-10, max. 10)
Supervised internship in a publications organization approved by the faculty adviser. A minimum of one internship is required of students majoring in human centered design and engineering. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 495

HCDE 496 Directed Research in Human Centered Design and Engineering (1-5, max. 10)
Students, working in teams under the supervision of individual faculty members, review relevant literature, pose research questions, design and conduct studies, and present the results in papers prepared either for submission to a professional journal or for presentation at a professional conference. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 496

HCDE 497 Study Abroad: Human Centered Design and Engineering (3-5, max. 15)
Upper-division human centered design and engineering courses, for which there are no direct University of Washington equivalents, taken through the Department of Human Centered Design and Engineering's study abroad program. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 497

HCDE 498 Special Topics (1-5, max. 15)
Special topics in human centered design and engineering to be offered occasionally by permanent or visiting faculty members.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 498

HCDE 499 Special Projects (1-5, max. 10)
Individual undergraduate projects in human centered design and engineering. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 499

HCDE 501 Theoretical Foundations of Human Centered Design and Engineering (4)
Examination of the theories that inform work in human centered design and engineering, focusing particularly on communication and interaction design theories. Topics include the complexities of communication as it is configured in different theoretical frameworks, the implications of these different configurations, and why these differences matter to people engaged in professional practice or research. Prerequisite: admission to an engineering master's program or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 501

HCDE 502 Empirical Traditions in Human Centered Design and Engineering (4)
Introduction to empirical traditions that inform research and practice in field of human centered design and engineering. Topics include epistemological assumptions underlying empirical research, empirical methods, and survey of results of empirical research on effects of text and visual media on comprehension, recall, and performance. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 502

HCDE 503 Navigating Desing in Organizations (4)
Examines how to manage the incubation and development of an idea, communicate it effectively to stakeholders, and deliver a quality product. Students learn to manage a design project from start to finish, collaborating across disciplines, working with partners and end-users, and communicating strategies for project management in organizations.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 503

HCDE 505 Computer-Assisted Communication (4)
Explores computer-assisted communication from three perspectives: (1) cultural roles of communication technologies; (2) relationships between communication and information including information technologies in the workplace, academe, and other settings; and (3) application to design including models for audience analysis, task analysis, and cognitive systems engineering. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 505

HCDE 509 Writing the Scientific Article (3)
Examination of principles and practice of writing research manuscripts, articles, abstracts, and oral presentations. Detailed examination of scientific publication process includes issues of style, organization, and ethics. Students draft, critique, and revise their own manuscripts and learn to review the manuscripts of others. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 509

HCDE 510 Information Design (4)
Examination of the design principles and procedures underlying the creation of both print and electronic information presentations. Topics include: print vs. electronic media, designing for the page and screen, information topologies, and hypermedia. Seminar includes a design project. Prerequisite: HCDE 501 or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 510

HCDE 511 Information Visualization (4)
Covers the design and presentation of digital information. Uses graphics, animation, sound, and other modalities in presenting information to users. Studies understanding vision and perception. Includes methods of presenting complex information to enhance comprehension and analysis; and incorporation of visualization techniques into human-computer interfaces.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 511

HCDE 512 International User Experience and Communication (4)
Covers theory, research, and approaches for creating digital media for international audiences. Topics include cultural schemata and contrastive rhetoric, content, and text types and corresponding translation and localization strategies, market relevance and adaptation, international user research and usability, international polices and geopolitics, and cross-cultural business management and team work. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 512

HCDE 513 Globalization and Localization Management (4) Spyridakis
Examines globalization and localization business processes. Topics include localization challenges for various business sectors and audiences as well as selecting localization software, services, and content; project types; and associated start-to-finish processes. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 513

HCDE 514 Strategies for International Product Management (4) Spyridakis
Examines best practices in establishing localization work in technology companies. Covers facets important to research, planning, and decision-making processes, including use of internal company data, and economic, marketing, and technology factors. Uses real-life scenarios to demonstrate how companies have instituted localization processes given user-centered practices. Prerequisite: HCDE 512; HDCE 513; or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 514

HCDE 515 Ecological Information Systems (4)
Introduction to cognitive work analysis framework. Prepares for active role in design and evaluation of information systems. Familiarization with basic concepts of cognitive systems engineering and practice in field study, data analysis, and transforming field findings into requirements for the design of an information system. Offered: jointly with INSC 515/LIS 515.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 515

HCDE 516 Experimental Research Methods (4)
Introduction to experimental research methods in human centered design and engineering. Examines the relationship between theory and research, hypothesis testing, experimental designs, modes of observation, sampling, validity, and data analysis and interpretation. Prerequisite: introductory statistics course. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 516

HCDE 517 Usability Studies (4)
Discusses the human-computer interface (HCI) as the communicative aspect of a computer system. Analyzes usability issues in HCI design, explores design-phase methods of predictability, and introduces evaluative methods of usability testing. Prerequisite: substantial experience with computers and graduate standing, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 517

HCDE 518 User-Centered Design (4)
Explores the user-centered design paradigm from a broad perspective, emphasizing how user research and prototype assessment can be integrated into different phases of the design process. Students learn to think like a user-centered designer and carry out activities that are key to user-centered design. Offered: jointly with IND E 545; W.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 518

HCDE 519 Qualitative Research Methods (4)
Provides hands-on experience with qualitative research methods, such as interviewing and participant observation, as used in human-centered design and engineering. Students learn to develop appropriate research questions, collect observational data, develop interview protocols, conduct interviews, analyze data, and communicate findings.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 519

HCDE 521 Seminar: Current Issues in Human Centered Design and Engineering (1-2, max. 3)
Presentations on current issues in human centered design and engineering. Prerequisite: HCDE graduate student status or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AW.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 521

HCDE 523 Design Use Build (DUB) Seminar (1, max. 3)
Exploration of advanced issues in human centered design and engineering research and practice. Students are encouraged to join the dub mailing list for calendar of events. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 523

HCDE 530 Computational Concepts in HCDE (4)
Introduces basic computational concepts and programming skills needed to work with interactive systems in HCDE. Draws on topics such as log analysis, visualization, prototyping, and data mining. Students analyze data to inform user research and design.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 530

HCDE 532 Web Design Studio (2)
Provides an overview of basic principles and practices of professional web site design and programming. Students gain hands-on experience with designing and building a successful website using industry standard techniques. For students planning to take HCDE 535 or HCDE 537 without previous programming experience.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 532

HCDE 534 Designing a Human Centered Venture (4)
Explores the planning of a new venture related to human-centered design. Examines relevant topics, such as team formation, user and market research, value creation, and the iterative demand planning for a new venture.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 534

HCDE 536 Interaction Design and Prototyping (4)
Investigates advanced topics in the theory and practice of interaction design, using a project-oriented approach. Develops expertise in design, development, and critique of solutions in online and mobile platforms. Examines issues such as interaction theory, requirements and specifications, design language, prototyping, and presentation of projects. Prerequisite: HCDE 518.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 536

HCDE 537 User-Centered Web Design (4)
Theory and practice of the user-centered web development process. Principles and processes for documenting and implementing various development stages, including requirements analysis, user needs analysis, information architecture, prototyping, mock-ups, and production. Prerequisite: HCDE 518.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 537

HCDE 539 Physical Computing and Prototyping (4)
Reviews fundamentals of designing and prototyping human-centered interactive systems and environments that include software and hardware components. Students build projects using electronic devices and fabrication tools. Provides hands on experience in a project-based, studio environment.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 539

HCDE 541 Grant Writing for Career Development (4)
Introduces the steps on compiling a grant proposal, with an emphasis on increasing research fluency. Provides hands-on experience with communicating research topics, particularly for the purpose of applying for grant support.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 541

HCDE 542 Theoretical Foundations in Human Centered Design and Engineering (4)
Examines theories that inform work in human centered design and engineering, focusing particularly on theories of communication and interaction design. Topics include complexities of interaction as it is configured in different theoretical frameworks, implications of these different configurations, and why these differences matter to people engaged in professional practice/research.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 542

HCDE 543 Empirical Traditions in Human Centered Design and Engineering (4)
Introduces empirical traditions that inform research and practice in the field of human centered design and engineering. Topics include epistemological assumptions underlying research approaches and a survey of empirical methods.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 543

HCDE 544 Research Methods I (4)
Introduces experimental, quasi-experimental, and related research methods in human centered design and engineering. Examines the relationship between theory and research, hypothesis testing, experimental designs, modes of observation, sampling, validity, and data analysis and interpretation. Students undertake an intensive research project. Prerequisite: Introductory statistics course.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 544

HCDE 545 Research Methods II (4)
Provides hands-on experience with qualitative research methods with particular emphasis on how ethnographic fieldwork methods (e.g., interviewing and participant observation) are used in human centered design and engineering. Students undertake an intensive research project at a field site, collecting and analyzing data.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 545

HCDE 546 Design Thinking (4)
Examines how design in enacted within disciplines, exploring commonalities and differences in design practices. Surveys empirical studies of design practices and approaches.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 546

HCDE 547 Academic Development Seminar (1, max. 10)
Addresses academic research and professional competencies necessary for doctoral students. Credit/no-credit only.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 547

HCDE 548 Advanced Topics in Human Centered Design and Engineering (4, max. 20)
In-depth examination of a specialized topic in an emerging area of human centered design and engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 548

HCDE 561 Advanced Japanese for Technical and Business Professions 1 (4) Tsutsui
Focuses on reading skills (e.g., vocabulary, phrases, grasping main ideas and paragraph structure) and familiarizes students with Japanese web sites and web reading tools. Students also develop the skills necessary for giving oral reports on technical/business articles. Teaches skills for writing summaries. Prerequisite: HCDE 463. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 561

HCDE 562 Advanced Japanese for Technical and Business Professions 2 (4) Tsutsui
Further develops reading skills. Students read more extensively, expand their technical/business vocabulary, and improve skills for grasping main ideas quickly. Students also improve oral skills for report giving and discussion and writing skills for emails and summaries. Laboratory work is required. Prerequisite: HCDE 561. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 562

HCDE 563 Advanced Japanese for Technical and Business Professions 3 (4) Tsutsui
Integrates the reading, oral, and writing skills acquired through the first-year and second-year technical/business Japanese sequences. Students work on research projects, give formal presentations, and submit project reports. Substantial individual readings are involved as well as individual conferences with the instructor on research methods, readings, and report drafts. Prerequisite: HCDE 562. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 563

HCDE 592 Capstone Planning (1)
Helps students define capstone topics, form project teams, and develop initial concepts, deliverables, and schedules for the HCDE capstone project.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 592

HCDE 593 Capstone (4)
Capstone design experience. Integration of knowledge and skills acquired during program into one project. Prerequisite: HCDE 518; HCDE 592.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 593

HCDE 596 Directed Research in Human Centered Design and Engineering (1-5, max. 18)
Students, working in teams under the supervision of individual faculty members, review relevant literature, pose research questions, design and conduct studies, and present the results in papers prepared either for submission to a professional journal or for presentation at a professional conference. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 596

HCDE 597 Approaches to Teaching Technical Communication (1-2, max. 2)
Examines theory and practice of teaching engineering undergraduate students written and oral technical communication competencies, strategies for developing teaching skills and philosophies. Teaching seminar for instructors of HCDE 231 and HCDE 333. Prerequisite: concurrent teaching appointment or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 597

HCDE 599 Special Projects (1-5, max. 5)
Written report required. Prerequisite: permission of graduate adviser or committee chair. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 599

HCDE 601 Internship (2-10, max. 10)
Written report required. Prerequisite: permission of committee chair. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 601

HCDE 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Prerequisite: permission of thesis adviser. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 700

HCDE 800 Doctoral Dissertation ([1-10]-)
Prerequisite: permission of thesis adviser. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: HCDE 800

IND E 101 Introduction to Industrial Engineering (1) I&S
Examines the basic concepts and methods of industrial engineering through team-based hands-on activities. Explores the profession of industrial engineering. Discusses resources available to industrial engineering students at the University of Washington. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 101

IND E 250 Fundamentals of Engineering Economy (4) NW Chaovalitwongse
Basics of industrial cost analysis and accounting. Application of interest computations to engineering decision making. Analysis of engineering alternatives based on use of interest computations, valuations, depreciation, and cost estimates. Offered: ASpS.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 250

IND E 315 Probability and Statistics for Engineers (3) NW Boyle, Johnson, Kapur, Mastrangelo
Application of probability theory and statistics to engineering problems, distribution theory and discussion of particular distributions of interest in engineering, statistical estimation and data analysis. Illustrative statistical applications may include quality control, linear regression, and analysis of engineering data sets. Prerequisite: either MATH 136, MATH 307, or AMATH 351. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 315

IND E 316 Design of Experiments and Regression Analysis (4) NW Kapur
Introduction to the analysis of data from planned experiments. Analysis of variance for multiple factors and applications of orthogonal arrays and linear graphs for fractional factorial designs to product and process design optimization. Regression analysis with applications in engineering. Prerequisite: IND E 315. Offered: jointly with STAT 316; W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 316

IND E 321 Statistical Quality Control (4) Boyle, Mastrangelo
Design of quality control and assurance systems. Statistical Process Control (SPC) design and implementation. Control charts for attributes and variables. Process capability analysis and process improvement techniques. Statistical tolerance design. Quality management and recent developments. Prerequisite: IND E 315. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 321

IND E 337 Introduction to Manufacturing Systems (4) Storch
Description of manufacturing systems. Includes discussion of current trends in manufacturing. Introduces process flow analysis, manufacturing organizations including job-shop, assembly lines, and group technology, manufacturing inventory philosophies (just-in-time, MRP, OPT), work environment, and work simplification.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 337

IND E 351 Human Factors in Design (4) Boyle
Engineering considerations of the abilities and limitations of the human aspect in the design of operational systems and components. Functional, psychological, physiological, and environmental considerations. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 351

IND E 410 Linear and Network Programming (4) Ghate, Zabinsky
Modeling and optimization of linear network problems. Topics include: optimization of linear systems, mathematical model design, simplex method, primal-dual algorithms, parametric programming, goal programming, network problems and algorithms, and PERT/CPM. Prerequisite: either MATH 136 or MATH 308; CSE 142. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 410

IND E 411 Stochastic Models and Decision Analysis (4) Ghate, Zabinsky
Stochastic systems analysis to industrial engineering problems. Topics include: Markov chains, queueing theory, queueing applications, and decision analysis. Prerequisite: IND E 315; IND E 410. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 411

IND E 412 Integer and Dynamic Programming (4) Ghate, Zabinsky
Modeling and optimization of problems and dynamic programming approach to optimization. Topics include: integer programming formulation techniques, linear and Lagrangian relaxation, branch-and-bound and cutting-plane methods, integer programming applications, and dynamic programming. Prerequisite: IND E 411. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 412

IND E 424 Simulation (4) Beamon
Discrete-event simulation methodology emphasizing model formulation and construction with modern simulation languages and environments, statistical basis for evaluating model results, design and management of simulation projects. Application to manufacturing, retail, and service industries. Prerequisite: IND E 337, which may be taken concurrently; IND E 411. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 424

IND E 426 Reliability Engineering and System Safety (4) Kapur
Reliability and system safety measures. Life distributions and their applications in reliability. System reliability models. Design by reliability and probabilistic design. Reliability and safety analysis through FMECA and FTA. Reliability estimation and measurement by testing for binomial, exponential, and Weibull distributions. Prerequisite: IND E 315. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 426

IND E 430 Manufacturing Scheduling and Inventory (4) Beamon
Manufacturing scheduling and inventory control for different work organizations. Coverage of workforce scheduling, job- and flow-shop scheduling and order release, production line balancing, MRP II, Lean Production, and data management. Particular attention to computer-based aspects of management and scheduling for manufacturing and service industries. Prerequisite: IND E 337; IND E 410, both of which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 430

IND E 439 Plant Layout and Material Handling (4) Beamon
Design of new or expanding industrial facilities. Consideration of work organization and layout. Study of basic design of plant systems, including plumbing, electrical, HVAC, illumination, acoustics, and waste handling. In depth coverage of material handling system design and equipment choices. Prerequisite: IND E 410 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 439

IND E 455 User Interface Design (4) Furness
Design oriented to cover fundamentals of user interface design; models on human computer interaction, software psychology, input devices, usability, cognitive and perceptual aspects of human-computer interaction, advanced interface, and research methodologies are discussed. Offered: jointly with HCDE 455; A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 455

IND E 470 Systems Engineering (4)
Concepts of system approach, system hierarchies, functional analysis, requirements, trade studies, and other concepts used to define and integrate complex engineering systems. Introduction to risk analysis and reliability, failure modes and effects analysis, writing specifications, and lean manufacturing. Offered: jointly with A A 470.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 470

IND E 494 Design in the Manufacturing Firm (4) Mastrangelo
Engineering design in manufacturing firms is presented. Topics include design methodology, concurrent engineering, and project management. Focus on the relationship between product design and manufacturing (design for production and assembly). Prerequisite: IND E 337. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 494

IND E 495 Industrial Engineering Design (4) Mastrangelo
Capstone senior design project involving identification and synthesis of industrial engineering skills. Students apply their knowledge of industrial engineering to actual industrial problems. Prerequisite: IND E 494. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 495

IND E 496 Technology-Based Entrepreneurship (3) Furness
Concentrates on hands-on aspects of innovation and entrepreneurial enterprise development. Examines relationships between innovation, iterative prototyping, and marketing testing. Students identify market opportunities, create new technology-based products and services to satisfy customer needs, and construct and test prototypes. Offered: jointly with M E 496.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 496

IND E 498 Special Topics in Industrial Engineering (1-5, max. 9)
Lecture and/or laboratory.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 498

IND E 499 Special Projects (2-5, max. 12)
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 499

IND E 508 Stochastic Processes in Engineering (3)
Non-measure theoretic introduction to stochastic processes. Topics include Poisson processes, renewal processes, Markov and semi-Markov processes, Brownian motion, and martingales, with applications to problems in queuing, supply chain management, signal processing, control, and communications. Prerequisite: E E 505. Offered: jointly with E E 508.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 508

IND E 512 Introduction to Optimization Models (3) Chaovalitwongse, Zabinsky
Presents optimization models that are used in applications such as industrial engineering, production, transportation, financial investment, healthcare systems, and environmental ecology. Problems span a variety of continuous and integer optimization models, with discussion of multi-objectives and incorporating randomness into optimization models.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 512

IND E 513 Linear Optimization Models in Engineering (3) Ghate, Zabinsky
Advanced formulation techniques to expand applications of linear programming to large-scale models. Appreciation of role of optimization models in engineering applications through introduction of techniques such as decomposition. Individual engineering projects. Prerequisite: IND E 410 and MATH 308 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 513

IND E 515 Fundamentals of Optimization (5)
Maximization and minimization of functions of finitely many variables subject to constraints. Basic problem types and examples of applications; linear, convex, smooth, and nonsmooth programming. Optimality conditions. Saddlepoints and dual problems. Penalties, decomposition. Overview of computational approaches. Prerequisite: linear algebra and advanced calculus. Offered: jointly with AMATH 515/MATH 515.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 515

IND E 516 Applications of Optimization in Engineering Design (3) Zabinsky
Discussion of issues arising in applications of optimization to engineering design. Emphasis on formulating problems and selecting appropriate solution techniques. Random search methods for problems otherwise computationally intractable. Individual projects in engineering optimal design. Prerequisite: AMATH 515/MATH 515/IND E 515 and MATH 328 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 516

IND E 521 Quality Control in Manufacturing (3) Mastrangelo
Design of quality control systems in manufacturing. Use of advanced statistical process controls, sampling inspection techniques, process capability, and other statistical tools. Also includes vendor sourcing and control tools, methods for establishing specifications and tolerances, quality function deployment, and other quality control techniques. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 521

IND E 524 Robust Design and Quality Engineering (3) Kapur
Introduction to robust design and quality engineering. Applications of design of experiments for product and process design optimization. Experimental design using orthogonal arrays and linear graphs. System models using Chebyshev's orthogonal polynomials. Robustness in design and quality improvement for complex systems including Taguchi methods for quality engineering. Prerequisite: IND E 316 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 524

IND E 526 Reliability in Product Design and Testing (3) Kapur
Product assurance including reliability and quality engineering. Reliability design, measurement, and optimization. Advanced topics in probabilistic design. Design of reliability test plans and analysis of test data. Design of reliability programs and their management. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 526

IND E 531 Computer Integrated Manufacturing (3)
Design and analysis of advanced manufacturing systems from a strategic as well as technological perspective. Focus on information generation, management, and coordination aspects of complex manufacturing organizations. Examination of system integration alternatives and consequences for relationships with customers and suppliers. Prerequisite: IND E 431 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with M E 505.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 531

IND E 535 Engineering Simulation (3) Beamon
Advanced applications of discrete event, continuous, and combined discrete-continuous simulation modeling, detailed examination of fundamental computer programming concepts underlying the design and development of simulation languages, variance reduction techniques, and output analysis for various engineering, service systems, and manufacturing applications. Prerequisite: IND E 424 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 535

IND E 537 Introduction to Manufacturing Systems (3)
Description of manufacturing systems. Includes discussion of current trends in manufacturing, especially lean principles. Introduces process flow analysis, manufacturing organizations including job-shop, assembly lines, and group technology, manufacturing inventory philosophies (just-in-time, MRP, OPT), work environment, and work simplification. Offered: jointly with ENV H 537; A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 537

IND E 538 Large Assembly Manufacturing Systems (3) Storch
Presents principles of group technology, zone construction, product-oriented work breakdown structure. Application to shipbuilding, aircraft, rail-car, and truck manufacture. Techniques of production planning, scheduling and control, organization, and plant layout, as well as the role of the computer, are studied in detail. Prerequisite: graduate standing.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 538

IND E 543 Virtual Interface Technology (1/3, max. 3) Furness
Explores advanced concepts and technologies for interfacing humans to complex machines, with focus on virtual interfaces. Interface design principles reviewed from psychological and technological perspectives. Hardware, software, and mindware aspects of virtual interfaces investigated. Applications postulated and designed. Prerequisite: graduate standing in College of Engineering or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 543

IND E 544 Virtual World Development (3) Furness
Software implementation, physiological and cognitive constraints, and the mathematics and philosophy of inclusion. Development of software tools, editing and interaction techniques, disposition of virtual world entities, nature of space, situated knowledge, divergent models for multiple participants, experiential mathematics, cyberspace. Cultural, legal, moral, ethical issues. Prerequisite: IND E 543 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 544

IND E 545 User-Centered Design (4)
Explores the user-centered design paradigm from a broad perspective, emphasizing how user research and prototype assessment can be integrated into different phases of the design process. Students learn to think like a user-centered designer and carry out activities that are key to user-centered design. Offered: jointly with HCDE 518; W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 545

IND E 546 Analytical Methods in Transportation I (3) Boyle
Application of analytical and statistical methods to issues in transportation and driving. Analysis of probability distributions that describe variables. Development of statistical models for predicting transportation phenomena. Elementary sampling theory hypothesis testing, regression analysis, time series analysis, applied to transportation data. Offered: jointly with CEE 584; W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 546

IND E 549 Human Factors in Engineering Design (3)
Engineering considerations of the abilities and limitations of the human aspect in the design of operational systems and components. Functional, psychological, physiological, and environmental considerations. Covers traditional human factors material with a project-based focus/emphasis. Offered: jointly with ENV H 549; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 549

IND E 551 Elements of Dynamic Enterprise Modeling (3)
Introduces practical techniques for modeling, analyzing, and implementing real-time enterprise control systems in application area such as manufacturing, supply chain flow control, and logistics decision schemas. Uses basic mathematical tools supported with a symbolic algebra software tool. Requires basic computer skills. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 551

IND E 552 Introduction to Real-Time Enterprise Control (3)
Provides students with principles, designs, techniques, and algorithms for synthesizing real-time control of enterprise processes, using hybrid systems theory. Application areas include supply chain flow control, logistics decision schemas, transportation systems, dynamic reconciliation procedures, minimum cost production, and maximum profit price/ordering strategies. Prerequisite: IND E 551, or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 552

IND E 553 Modeling and Automation of Enterprise Processes (3)
Third course in a three-course sequence. Provides architecture, algorithms, and procedures for designing and implementing enterprise control policies for automating and enhancing enterprise functionality. Emphasis on hybrid system theories. Prerequisite: IND E 552, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 553

IND E 564 Recognition of Health and Safety Problems in Industry (2)
Develops skills in occupational health and safety hazard recognition in a variety of important Northwest industries. Focuses on process understanding and hazard recognition skills during walk-through inspections of several local facilities, stressing a multidisciplinary approach. Offered: jointly with ENV H 564; A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 564

IND E 566 Introduction to Ergonomics (3)
Basic principles of ergonomics in work environment applied to problems of worker and management. Topics include measurement of physical work capacity, problems of fatigue and heat stress, applied biomechanics, worker-machine interactions and communication, design of displays and controls. Prerequisite: basic human physiology or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ENV H 566/NSG 508; W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 566

IND E 567 Applied Occupational Health and Safety (3)
Application of occupational safety and health principles. Student teams perform evaluations, assess production methods/processes and exposures, health and safety procedures and programs, and develop engineering and administrative controls. Students perform on a consulting project with a local company including budgeting, project reporting, and presentation. Offered: jointly with ENV H 559/NSG 505; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 567

IND E 569 Occupational Biomechanics (4)
Lectures and laboratories address human occupational biomechanical and physiological limits and measurement, analysis, and modeling techniques that are used by ergonomists for design of safe, healthful, and productive physical work. Prerequisite: ENV H 566 or permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with ENV H 569; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 569

IND E 570 Supply Chain Systems (3) Beamon
Develops concepts related to the design, evaluation, and performance of supply chain systems through an exploration of contemporary practice and research, focusing on current issues, analytical frameworks, and case studies. Prerequisite: IND E 315 or equivalent.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 570

IND E 571 Humanitarian Logistics (3) Beamon
Explores the basic challenges, requirements and techniques for managing logistics operation within the domain of humanitarian relief. Students work in multi-disciplinary teams, applying course concepts and techniques to theoretical and real world humanitarian crises.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 571

IND E 575 Inventory Management (5) Jain
Examines modeling and analysis of inventory flow in supply chains in order to improve service and decrease cost. Covers tools and methods for making long-term and short-term inventory related decisions for items with different demand and supply characteristics. Topics include forecasting, production planning, deterministic and stochastic inventory models, and supply management. Offered: jointly with SCTL 503; W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 575

IND E 576 Facility Design and Operations Management (5) Heim
Introduces the fundamental principles , concepts, and procedures for designing and managing supply-chain networks of factories, suppliers, warehouses, and distribution centers. Students learn to use engineering systems design methodologies and software to construct appropriately detailed quantitative models, evaluate alternative supply network configurations, and assess the management of their operations. Offered: jointly with SCTL 504; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 576

IND E 581 Navigating the Business Environment (3) Mastrangelo
Covers the fundamentals of finance and accounting, marketing, strategy, and business communication as well as the skill of identifying and influencing the key decision maker. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 581

IND E 582 Technical Leadership (3) Mastrangelo
Includes how to motivate, reach consensus, work virtually, recruit, and work with engineers from different cultures. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 582

IND E 583 Decision Analysis in Engineering (3) Mastrangelo
Examines multi-criteria decision tools involving qualitative and quantitative methods. Covers decision trees, subjective probability, utility and value theories, goals and objectives, risk, optimization, and simulation. Includes case studies in decision and systems analysis. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 583

IND E 584 Project Performance (3) Mastrangelo
Examines the fundamentals of project performance and application of systems engineering theory, concepts, and tools and techniques to plan, manage, and accomplish organizational objectives in a project framework. Also considers the critical roles leadership and team development plays in successful completion of projects. Offered: S.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 584

IND E 591 Seminar (1-)
Topics of current interest in industrial engineering. Prerequisite: graduate standing in Industrial Engineering or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 591

IND E 592 Seminar (-1-)
Topics of current interest in industrial engineering. Prerequisite: graduate standing in Industrial Engineering or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 592

IND E 593 Seminar (-1)
Topics of current interest in industrial engineering. Prerequisite: graduate standing in Industrial Engineering or permission of instructor. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 593

IND E 595 Global Integrated Systems Engineering ([4/6]-, max. 10)
Covers systems engineering, project management, finance, economics, and a seminar on global technical topics. Offered: jointly with A A 595; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 595

IND E 596 Global Integrated Systems Engineering Project (3) Mastrangelo
Project-based systems design course. Prerequisite: A A/INDE 595. Offered: jointly with A A 596; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 596

IND E 599 Special Topics in Industrial Engineering (1-5, max. 9)
Prerequisite: permission of supervisor.
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 599

IND E 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 600

IND E 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 700

IND E 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
View course details in MyPlan: IND E 800

MSE 170 Fundamentals of Materials Science (4) NW
Fundamental principles of structure and properties of materials utilized in practice of engineering. Properties of materials are related to atomic, molecular, crystalline structure. Metals, ceramics, multiphase systems, and polymeric materials. Relationships between structure and electrical, mechanical, thermal, chemical properties. For advanced freshmen and sophomores. Prerequisite: either CHEM 152, CHEM 154, or CHEM 155. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 170

MSE 273 Introduction to Molecular Engineering of Interfaces and Surfaces (2) NW
Covers interfaces and surfaces critical in every field of science, engineering, and medicine from catalytic reactions, drug delivery systems, biocompatibility, carbon fiber composites, semiconductor design, and global warming. Combines active learning, case studies, and hands-on laboratory exploration in nanotechnology. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 273

MSE 298 Introduction to Modern Materials (1)
Materials and advances in materials are at the core of a large number of significant technological advances. Seminar format highlights processing, properties, and uses of a broad class of materials for a variety of applications, each introduced by a faculty member from the department. Offered: ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 298

MSE 310 Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering (3)
Introduces the materials field to new department majors. Examples are drawn from ceramics, metals, polymers, electronic materials, and composites. Structure-properties-manufacturing-design relationships are emphasized. Materials selection design project. Introduction to research. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 310

MSE 311 Integrated Junior Laboratory I (3)
Laboratory experimental techniques including writing, literature search, research planning, and computer applications. Optical microscopy experiments, sample preparations, X-ray equipment, and X-ray diffraction analysis of materials. Prerequisite: MSE 170. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 311

MSE 312 Integrated Junior Laboratory II (3)
Materials processing related laboratory experiments, including powder synthesis, redox reactions of particulate materials, grain growth, recyrstallization, phase transformation, green tape processing, particle interaction and rheology, slip and tape casting and dry processing, sol-gel processing, polymer processing, sintering behavior, metal welding, and heat treatment. Prerequisite: MSE 311. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 312

MSE 313 Integrated Junior Laboratory III (3)
Kinetics and phase transformation related laboratory experiments, including solidification. Mechanical properties related laboratory experiments, including stress-strain behavior of materials and elastic modulus of materials, effect of work hardening on stress strain behavior, and effect of surface condition of the strength of glass. Prerequisite: MSE 313. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 313

MSE 321 Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibrium (4)
Phase equilibria in materials systems of one, two, and three components. Determination of phase diagrams. Quantitative applications of thermodynamics to systems of interest to materials scientists; detained review of thermodynamic laws and principles. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 321

MSE 322 Kinetics and Microstructural Evolution (4)
Applications of thermodynamic and kinetic principles to the study of transport processes, transformations and reactions in engineering materials. Thermal activation and rates of processes, nucleation and growth, phase transformations, grain growth, sintering, among other processes. Prerequisite: MSE 321. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 322

MSE 331 Crystallography and Structure (3)
Theory and practice of x-ray diffraction with applications to materials sitemaps. Principles of crystal symmetry, lattice systems, and stereographic projections. Bragg's law of diffraction, Laue conditions, diffraction by X-rays, single crystal and powder diffraction techniques and their applications to lattice, phase, strain, and texture analyses. Prerequisite: MSE 170. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 331

MSE 333 Materials Characterization (3)
Principles and applications of analytical techniques, imaging, diffraction and spectroscopy for materials characterization including crystal structures, texture formation, phase analysis. Nano- and micro-structures of materials including defects and second phases, chemistry, bonding, compositions of materials. Demonstrations and lab experiments involving light scattering and diffraction techniques. Prerequisite: MSE 170; MSE 331; MSE 351. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 333

MSE 342 Materials Processing I (3)
Provides students with the fundamentals and applications of metal and alloy processing techniques. Focuses on relationships between the processing fundamentals and practice, and between processing, microstructure, and properties. Ferrous and non-ferrous metal and alloy processing discussed. Prerequisite: MSE 170; MSE 322. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 342

MSE 351 Electronic Properties of Materials (3)
Introduction to elementary solid-state concepts in materials, free electrons, and band theories. Principles to conduction in metals, insulators, semiconductors, and applications of semiconductors and devices. Prerequisite: MSE, 170, MSE 331. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 351

MSE 352 Functional Properties of Materials I (3)
Introduction to thermal properties, electrical (ionic and polaron) conduction and optical properties, including origins of color, interaction of light wave with materials, lasers and optoelectronics. Focuses on the relations between physical properties and chemical composition, crystal structure, and microstructure. Prerequisite: MSE 351. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 352

MSE 362 Mechanical Behavior of Materials I (3)
Influence of structure on the mechanical properties materials. Definition of different mechanical properties and experimental techniques to measure them. Elastic, viscoelastic, and plastic deformation. Introduction to fracture. Prerequisite: MSE 170. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 362

MSE 399 Undergraduate Research Seminar (1)
Introduces MSE majors to various research projects available to MSE faculty laboratories. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 399

MSE 421 Case Studies in Thermodynamics (3)
Applications of thermodynamics to the steady state. Statistical interpretation of entropy. Heterogeneous equilibria. Thermodynamics of solutions. Defects in solids and thermodynamics of surfaces. Prerequisite: MSE 321, MSE 322. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 421

MSE 431 Failure Analysis and Durability of Materials (3)
Treats the areas of failure analysis and durability in a wide range of materials applications. Reviews concepts in mechanical and environmental behavior of materials. Includes instruments available to engineers, both destructive and nondestructive, and case studies. Prerequisite: MSE 333; MSE 342; MSE 362. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 431

MSE 442 Materials Processing II (3)
Develops a basic understanding of both engineering and science aspects of ceramic processing. Fundamentals of powder processing and characterization, green body formation, sintering, microstructural development and properties. Prerequisite: MSE 342. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 442

MSE 443 Process Principles in Ferrous and Non-Ferrous Materials Production (3)
Ironmaking and steelmaking processes analyzed by methods of material and heat balances, computational thermodynamics, and process kinetics. Hydrometallurgical and electrometallurgical operations. Process optimization. Prerequisite: MSE 321. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 443

MSE 450 Magnetism, Magnetic Materials, and Related Technologies (3)
Introduces magnetism, magnetic materials, and related applications. Discusses intrinsic and phenomenological concepts of magnetism, ordered magnetics materials, structure-sensitive properties, magnetic phenomena, small particles, thin films, and applications (magnetic recording, permanent magnets, and spin-electronics.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 450

MSE 452 Functional Properties of Materials II (4)
Dielectric materials including ferroelectrics, piezoelectrics and pyroelectrics, magnetic properties, high temperature superconductivity, shape memory materials. Detained discussion on relations of these properties with atomic and crystal structures, and applications. Prerequisite: MSE 351, MSE 352. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 452

MSE 462 Mechanical Behavior of Materials II (4)
Influence of structure on the mechanical properties of materials. Stress-strain tensors and response of materials to multiaxial loads. Effect of symmetry on elastic properties; spring dashpot analogs for viscoelasticity; strengthening mechanisms and continuum plasticity; failure probability and toughening mechanisms; creep, fatigue, and stress corrosion cracking. Prerequisite: AA 210; CEE 220; MSE 362. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 462

MSE 463 Corrosion and Wear of Materials (4)
Mechanisms of corrosion, thermodynamics, kinetics of corrosion. Passivity; Pourbaix diagrams; corrosion rate testing and measurements; forms of corrosion; effects of alloy and environmental variables; corrosion testing. Wear mechanisms: adhesive, abrasive, erosive. Fretting; surface roughness, wear testing. Coatings for corrosion and wear protection. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 463

MSE 471 Introduction to Polymer Science and Engineering (3)
Introduction of preparative methods of polymers; physical chemistry of polymeric molecules in solution, liquid and solid phase; thermodynamics of polymers; methods of characterization; mechanical properties; fabrication techniques; properties of commercial polymers. Recommended: one quarter of physical chemistry; one quarter of organic chemistry. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 471

MSE 473 Noncrystalline State (4)
Chemistry and physics of inorganic glass and amorphous semiconductors; structure, properties, and processing of vitreous materials. Prerequisite: MSE 170; MSE 321; MSE 331. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 473

MSE 475 Introduction to Composite Materials (4)
Microstructural design and processing of composite materials; polymeric, metallic, and ceramic matrices; fibers and fiber-reinforced composites, thermal, mechanical, and electrical properties. Recommended: either MSE 170 or equivalent; either CEE 220 or equivalent; either MATH 308, MATH 318, or equilvalent. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 475

MSE 477 High Temperature Materials (4)
Chemical and mineralogical composition; processing methods; thermal, physical, and chemical properties and tests; application in high-temperature processes. Prerequisite: MSE 310, MSE 321. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 477

MSE 481 Science and Technology of Nanostructures (3)
Comprehensive introduction to the developing field of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Includes materials properties as a function of length-scale and dimensionality, applications in medicine/biology, electronics, magnetism, and electro-mechanical systems. Cooperative learning approaches involving student participation with team assignments, class activities, lectures, and laboratory visits. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 481

MSE 482 Biomaterials/Nanomaterials in Tissue Engineering (3)
Provides fundamental understanding of biomaterials, implant applications, and their design consideration. Includes the fundamentals of synthesis, properties, and biocompatibility of metallic, ceramic, polymeric, composite, and biological materials and their applications for both hard and soft tissue replacement, and controlled drug delivery.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 482

MSE 483 Nanomedicine (3)
Covers methods of synthesis and characterization of nano-sized materials and specific considerations for use in biological systems.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 483

MSE 484 Materials Chemistry (3) NW
Overview of basic principles, techniques, and applications associated with solid materials. Topics include description of crystals, examples of crystal structures, structural analysis, band structures of solid materials, preparation of materials, materials for microelectronics, and materials for information technology. Prerequisite: CHEM 453 or CHEM 455. Offered: jointly with CHEM 484; ASp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 484

MSE 485 Introduction to Electronic Packaging and Materials (3) Taya
The governing equations of transport phenomena: mechanical, thermal, and electromagnetic behavior, thermomechanical and electromagnetic properties of packaging materials, electromagnetic characteristics of circuit and transmission lines, thermal management and reliability analysis of packaging, interconnect and material processing technology. Prerequisite: MSE 170. Offered: jointly with M E 485; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 485

MSE 486 Fundamentals of Integrated Circuit Technology (3)
Processing physics, chemistry, and technology, including evaporation, sputtering, epitaxial growth, diffusion, ion implantation, laser annealing, oxidation, chemical vapor deposition, photoresists. Design considerations for bipolar and MOS devices, materials and process characterization. Future trends. Prerequisite: either both E E 331 and E E 361 or MSE 351. Offered: jointly with E E 486; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 486

MSE 487 Laboratory in Electronic Packaging and Materials (1) Taya, Stoebe
Laboratory course to accompany M E 485 Experiments related to design, processing and reliability of electronic packaging used in consumer electronics. Co-requisite: M E 485. Offered: jointly with M E 487.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 487

MSE 491 Design in Materials Engineering I (2)
Integration of technical materials engineering concepts with professional components related to materials engineering. Reviews materials design, teamwork, leadership, engineering economics, and ethics. Reports on the professional components important to the senior thesis and begins a two-quarter, team design project on materials engineering. Prerequisite: MSE 313. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 491

MSE 492 Design in Materials Engineering II (2)
Integration of technical materials engineering concepts with professional components related to materials engineering. Reviews process design, manufacturability, and quality control. Completes the two-quarter team design project on materials engineering. Prerequisite: MSE 491. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 492

MSE 497 Undergraduate Research (1-5, max. 12)
Research in materials under faculty supervision other than the MSE senior project. Cannot be used toward the technical elective requirements in the MSE major. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 497

MSE 498 Special Topics (1-5, max. 15)
Special topics in materials science and engineering offered as a course with lectures, conferences, or laboratory. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 498

MSE 499 Special Project (*-, max. 5)
Materials science and engineering field or laboratory investigations in group or individual setting. Written report required. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 499

MSE 501 Advanced Processing of Inorganic Materials (3)
Discusses advanced processes of inorganic materials including metals, ceramics, and electronic materials, such as high temperature processing, sintering, solidification, single crystal growth form liquid, and vapor phase deposition. Emphasizes both the fundamentals and practical approaches of these processing techniques. Offered: A, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 501

MSE 502 Sol-Gel Processing (3)
Fundamentals of colloid science and the physics and chemistry of the sol-gel process. Emphasizes the synthesis and applications of various materials, such as multi-component oxides, nano-composites, meso- and microporous materials, organic/inorganic hybrids, and biomaterials that have important applications in both leading technologies and modern industries. Offered: A, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 502

MSE 504 Introduction to Microelectro Mechanical Systems (4)
Theoretical and practical aspects in design, analysis, and fabrication of MEMS devices. Fabrication processes, including bulk and surface micromachining. MEMS design and layout. MEMS CAD tools. Mechanical and electrical design. Applications such as micro sensors and actuators, or chemical and thermal transducers, recent advances. Offered: jointly with E E 502/M E 504.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 504

MSE 510 Bonding, Crystallography, and Symmetry-Related Properties of Materials (3)
Rigorous introduction to the fundamentals of bonding, symmetry, crystallography, and related properties. Quantum mechanical foundation of cohesion and properties of solids. Geometric approach to understanding symmetry elements in 2-D and 3-D, including point groups, space groups, stereographic projections, and bravais lattices. Tensor properties of crystals related to crystallography and symmetry. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 510

MSE 512 Experimental Transmission Electron Microscopy (3)
Fundamentals of electron optics as applied to microscopy; applications of contrast theories and electron diffraction with emphasis on defects and multiphase structures in crystalline solids. Prerequisite: MSE 510. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 512

MSE 513 Transmission Electron Microscopy Laboratory (2)
One four-hour laboratory and one two-hour discussion/demonstration per week; metallic, ceramic, electronic biological sample preparation techniques; diffraction, imaging, and spectroscopy techniques in electron microscopy. Prerequisite: MSE 512 which may be taken concurrently. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 513

MSE 515 Advanced Transmission Electron Microscopy (3)
Principles of image formation in crystalline and amorphous materials at the atomic resolution level; high spatial resolution electron diffraction with emphasis on convergent beam electron diffraction; quantitative elemental compositional and chemical analysis with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy; high voltage electron microscopy. Prerequisite: MSE 512 and MSE 513.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 515

MSE 518 Advanced Mineralogy (3)
Crystal symmetry: point groups, space groups. Mathematical description of crystal structures; group theory, irreducible representations; tensor description of physical properties: stress, strain, piezoelectricity, elasticity; structural and magnetic phase transitions, Landau theory, deformation and creep crystals; elasto-viscous properties of Earth's mantle, crystal chemistry, solid state reactions. Offered: jointly with ESS 537; A.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 518

MSE 520 Seminar (1, max. 6)
Review of research problems in recent literature. Registration required for all graduate students. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 520

MSE 524 Applied Rate Phenomena (3)
Introduction to rate theory and transport processes. The principal thrust is on applications in ceramics and metallurgy. Prerequisite: basic course in transport phenomena or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 524

MSE 525 Kinetics and Phase Transformations (3)
Thermodynamic basis for kinetic processes, including diffusion and phase transformation kinetics. Diffusion problems and solution methodologies, statistical treatment of diffusion, solid-liquid and solid-solid transformations, ordering transitions. Special topics related to grain growth, sintering, martensitic transformations. Prerequisite: MSE 322 and MSE 421 or equivalent. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 525

MSE 528 Physics and Modeling f VLSI Fabrication (4)
Physics of VLSI fabrication, emphasizing processing modeling and simulation. CMOS process, sequences, point defects and diffusion, ion implantation and annealing, film growth kinetics, deposition and etching, advanced photolithography. Process interactions and process integration. Extensive use of process simulation software. Prerequisite: either E E 486/MSE 467, E E 520/M E 504/MSE 504, or E E 527. Offered: jointly with E E 528.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 528

MSE 541 Defects in Materials (3)
Detailed study of the general properties and effects of point, line, and planar defects in crystalline solids. Prerequisite: MSE 331 or equivalent. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 541

MSE 550 Magnetism, Magnetic Materials, and Related Technologies (3)
Introduce magnetism, magnetic materials, and related applications. Discusses intrinsic and phenomenological concepts of magnetism, ordered magnetic materials, magnetic phenomena, small particles, thin films, and applications (magnetic recording, permanent magnets, and spin-electronic). Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 550

MSE 555 Biomimetics: Bioinspired Design and Processing of Materials (4)
How biological organisms produce materials with controlled structure, chemistry, and hierarchy to attain physical properties far superior to traditional engineering materials. Fundamental biological building materials, their synthesis, and their self-assembly with emphasis on examples of soft and hard tissues. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 555

MSE 560 Organic Electronic and Photonic Materials/Polymers (3)
Physical and material concepts determining properties of organic electronic and photonic materials. Discusses electronic structure, physico-chemical characterization, and device application. Includes introduction of electronic band structure of polymers, electrically conducting polymers; organic nonlinear optical electroluminescent materials; polymer optical fibers; tow-photon absorption materials for 3-D microfabrication. Offered: jointly with CHEM 564; W.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 560

MSE 562 Introduction to Electronic Composites (3) Taya
Fundamentals of microstructure-macro-property relation of electronic composites. This course covers applications (computers, laser packages, medical devices, MEMS, avionics), functions (mechanical, thermal, electromagnetic, and optical), microstructure-macro-property relations, processing issues, and modeling of electronic composites. Recommended: M E 450 or MSE 475. Offered: jointly with M E 562; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 562

MSE 563 Advanced Composites: Design and Manufacturing (3)
Manufacturing and processing techniques of metal-, polymer-, and ceramic-matrix composites; design considerations related to manufacturing techniques; non-destructive testing of composite structures. Fiber-matrix interfacial features and interactions. Interfacial thermodynamics applied to selection of fiber-matrix combinations. Prerequisite: MSE 475 or M E 450 or equivalent by permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with M E 563; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 563

MSE 565 Electron Theory of Materials (3)
Solid-state concepts of materials. Atomic bonding, statistical mechanics, Brillouin zone theory. Applications to conduction, optical, and magnetic properties of metals, semiconductors, and insulators. Offered: W, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 565

MSE 568 Active and Sensing Materials (3) Taya
Fundamental knowledge of the nano-structure property relations of active and sensing materials, and their devices. Examples of the active and sensing materials include: shape memory alloys (SMAs), ferromagnetic SMAs, ferroelectric, pyroelectric and piezoelectric materials, thermoelectrics, electroactive and conducting polymers, photoactive polymers, photovoltaics, and electrochromic materials. Offered: jointly with M E 568; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 568

MSE 570 Graduate Tutorial in Materials Science and Engineering (3)
A materials science and engineering tutorial for beginning graduate students who did not major in the field as an undergraduate, or who which to broaden their knowledge of materials science and engineering. Focuses on materials' physical and chemical structures, and their relationship to mechanical, electrical, dielectric, optical, magnetic, and thermal properties.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 570

MSE 582 Biomaterials/Nanomaterials in Tissue Engineering (3)
Provides fundamental understanding of biomaterials, implant applications, and their design consideration. Includes the fundamentals of synthesis, properties, and biocompatibility of metallic, ceramic, polymeric, composite, and biological materials and their applications for both hard and soft tissue replacement, and controlled drug delivery.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 582

MSE 583 Nanomedicine (3)
Covers methods of synthesis and characterization of nano-sized materials and specific considerations for use in biological systems.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 583

MSE 598 Engineering Materials Problems (4)
Involves a concentrated project which may include the design of a system or process, or analysis of a set of data related to the materials engineering area. Requires a professional quality report and an oral presentation of the results. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 598

MSE 599 Special Topics in Materials Science (1-5, max. 15)
Studies of special advanced topics in materials science. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 599

MSE 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 600

MSE 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 700

MSE 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: MSE 800

M E 123 Introduction to Visualization and Computer-Aided Design (4) VLPA/NW Adee
Methods of depicting three-dimensional objects and communicating design information. Development of three-dimensional skills through freehand sketching and computer-aided design using parametric solid modeling. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 123

M E 124 Visualization and Computer-Aided Design Laboratory (2) VLPA/NW Adee
Methods of depicting three-dimensional objects and communicating design information. Development of three-dimensional visualization skills through computer-aided design using parametric solid modeling. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 124

M E 230 Kinematics and Dynamics (4) NW Fabien
Kinematics of particles, systems of particles, and rigid bodies; moving reference frames; kinetics of particles, systems of particles, and rigid bodies; equilibrium, energy, linear momentum, angular momentum. Prerequisite: A A 210.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 230

M E 323 Engineering Thermodynamics (5) Kramlich
Engineering thermodynamics, including thermodynamic concepts and properties, the first and second laws of thermodynamics, energy conversion, refrigeration, humidification, and combustion. Engineering design applications. Prerequisite: either CHEM 142 or CHEM 144; MATH 126; PHYS 121.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 323

M E 331 Introduction to Heat Transfer (4) Emery
Study of heat transfer by conduction, radiation, and convection; elementary heat-exchanger design. Prerequisite: either M E 333 or CEE 342.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 331

M E 333 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics (5) Riley
Introduction to the basic fluid laws and their application. Conservation equations, dynamic similarity, potential flow, boundary-layer concepts, effects of friction, compressible flow, fluid machinery, measurement techniques. Prerequisite: AMATH 301; M E 323; either MATH 307 or AMATH 351.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 333

M E 341 Energy and Environment (3) NW
Energy use. Fossil energy conversion. Oil, gas, coal resources. Air impacts. Nuclear energy principles, reactors, fuel cycle. Prerequisite: either MATH 112, MATH 124, or Q SCI 291; either CHEM 120, CHEM 142, CHEM 144, PHYS 114, or PHYS 121. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 341/ENVIR 341; A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 341

M E 354 Mechanics of Materials Laboratory (5) Tuttle
Properties and behavior of engineering materials including stress-strain relations, strength, deformation mechanisms, strength, deformation, fracture, creep, and cyclic fatigue. Introduces experimental techniques common to structural engineering, interpretation of experimental data, comparison of measurements to numerical/analytical predictions, and formal, engineering report writing. Lecture and laboratory. Prerequisite: MSE 170, CEE 220.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 354

M E 355 Introduction to Manufacturing Processes (4) Ramulu
Study of manufacturing processes, including interrelationships between the properties of the material, the manufacturing process, and the design of components. Interpretation of experimental data, comparison of measurements to numerical/analytical predictions, and formal, engineering report writing. Prerequisite: M E 354.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 355

M E 356 Machine Design Analysis (4) Chung
Analysis, design, and selection of mechanical and electromechanical subsystems and elements, such as gears, linkages, cams, motors, and bearings. Prerequisite: M E 354.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 356

M E 373 Introduction to System Dynamics (5) Garbini
Mathematical modeling, analysis, and design of physical dynamic systems involving energy storage and transfer by lumped-parameter linear elements. Time-domain response by analytical methods and numeric simulation. Laboratory experiments. Prerequisite: either AMATH 351 or MATH 307; either AMATH 352 or MATH 308; E E 215; M E 230.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 373

M E 374 Systems Dynamic Analysis and Design (5) Garbini
Extension of M E 373. Frequency response analysis, generalized impedance concepts and applications, Fourier series analysis and Laplace transform techniques. Modeling and analysis of electromechanical actuators and rotating machinery. Laboratory experiments and design projects. Prerequisite: AMATH 301; M E 373.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 374

M E 395 Introduction to Mechanical Design (4) Cooper
Design process and methodology; decision making; optimization techniques; project planning; engineering economics; probabilistic and statistical aspects of mechanical design; ethical and legal issues. Prerequisite: M E 123; M E 323; IND E 315 or MATH 390/STAT 390 either of which may be taken concurrently.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 395

M E 406 Corrosion and Surface Treatment of Materials (3) Sandwith
Corrosion fundamentals and forms (galvanic, crevice, pitting, stress corrosion, erosion, hydrogen, and leaching). Principles of design, materials selection, cathodic protection and surface treatments (coatings, carburizing, nitriding, and plating) applied to reduce corrosion. Failure analysis applied to case studies.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 406

M E 409 Introduction to Numerical Control and Computer-Aided Manufacturing (3) Ramulu
Control system fundamentals, numerical control (NC) machine control systems, and the design aspect of NC machine tools, programming methods of NC machines, computer-aided manufacturing, CNC, DNC, and process optimization. Prerequisite: M E 355 which may be taken concurrently.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 409

M E 410 Nanodevices: Design and Manufacture (3) Chung
Examines design, fabrication, and manufacture of nano devices with state-of-the-art nanotechnology. Covers classification and selection of nanoscale materials and manufacturing methods: Includes nanodevice design projects. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 410

M E 411 Biological Frameworks for Engineers (3) Sniadecki
Introduces the fundamentals of biology for an engineer. Covers mechanisms and biomechanics of DNA, proteins, cells, connective tissue, musculoskeletal tissue, and cardiovascular tissue, integration principles of living systems, structure-function relationships, and techniques to study biology and medicine, and tissue engineering. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 411

M E 414 Engineering Innovation in Medicine (3) J. POSNER, P. REINHALL
Introduces the role of innovation and engineering in the design of medical devices and healthcare technologies, applicable both to medical practice and healthcare-focused engineering. Discusses medical practice, clinical needs finding, FDA regulation, insurance reimbursement, intellectual property, and the medical device design process. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 414

M E 415 Sustainability and Design for Environment (3) Cooper
Analysis and design of technology systems within the context of the environment, economy, and society. Applies the concepts of resource conservation, pollution prevention, life cycle assessment, and extended product responsibility. Examines the practice, opportunities, and role of engineering, management, and public policy. Offered: jointly with CEE 495/ENVIR 415.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 415

M E 425 HVAC Engineering (4) Emery
Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning of built environment. Human comfort, psychometric processes, load computations, fluid distribution, and controls. Design analysis of HVAC system is taught in the lectures and applied in the class project. Prerequisite: M E 323; M E 331.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 425

M E 426 Sustainable Energy Design (3) Malte
Energy systems with renewable energy and efficient use of energy. Project-based learning: analysis, systems engineering, design, component characteristics, and environmental impacts. Prerequisite: M E 333.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 426

M E 430 Advanced Energy Conversion Systems (4) Kramlich
Advanced and renewable energy conversion systems and technologies are treated. Included are high efficiency combined cycles; renewable energy conversion involving solar, wind, and biomass; direct energy conversion and fuel cells; and nuclear energy. Environmental consequences of energy conversion and environmental control are discussed. Prerequisite: M E 323.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 430

M E 431 Advanced Fluid Mechanics (4) Mescher
Advanced topics in fluid mechanics, including kinematics, potential theory and vortex dynamics, viscous flow, turbulence, experimental and numerical methods, and design. Prerequisite: M E 333.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 431

M E 433 Turbomachinery (4) Aliseda
Thermodynamics, gas dynamics, and fluid mechanics of axial and centrifugal compressors, pumps, and turbines. Selection of components for engineering applications. Design problems and/or laboratory experiments to illustrate operating characteristics of turbomachines.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 433

M E 440 Advanced Mechanics of Materials and Solids (3)
Study of mechanics of deformable bodies, including three-dimensional stress and strain tensors and their transformations. Equations of compatibility, continuity and equilibrium. Elastic constants. Failure criteria including fracture, yield, and instability. Deflection relations for complex loading and shapes. Indeterminate problems. Design applications and numerical methods. Prerequisite: M E 354.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 440

M E 442 Renewable Energy (4) NW P. MALTE
Introduction to renewable energy. Principles and practices: solar, wind, water, and biomass energy conversion. Prerequisite: either M E 323, CHEM E 325, A A 260, or E E 351. Offered: jointly with CHEM E 442; W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 442

M E 445 Introduction to Biomechanics (4) J. SANDERS
Presents the mechanical behavior of tissues in the body and the application to design of prostheses. Tissues studies include bone, skin, fascia, ligaments, tendons, heart valves, and blood vessels. Discussion of the structure of these tissues and their mechanical response to different loading configurations. An important part of the class is a final project. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 440; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 445

M E 450 Introduction to Composite Materials and Design (3) Tuttle
Stress and strain analysis of continuous fiber composite materials. Orthotropic elasticity, lamination theory, failure criterion, and design philosophies, as applied to structural polymeric composites. Recommended: MSE 475.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 450

M E 459 Introduction to Fracture Mechanics (3) Ramulu
Deformation processes leading to fracture, and linear elastic fracture mechanics. Fatigue crack propagation. Fracture control and failure analysis. Prerequisite: M E 354; M E 356.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 459

M E 460 Kinematics and Linkage Design (3) Ganter
Synthesis of linkage-type mechanisms using graphical and computer methods.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 460

M E 461 Mechanics of Thin Films (3) Wang
Provides an overview of the thin film deposition processes; the stress and microstructure development during film growth; the mechanisms of adhesion; delamination and fracture; and the state-of-the-art characterization techniques for the microstructure and mechanical properties of thin films, coatings, and nanomaterials. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 461

M E 468 Air-Pollution Control Equipment Design (3)
Designs to control air pollutants from stationary sources. Procedures for calculating design and operating parameters. Fundamental mechanisms and processes of gaseous and particulate control equipment for absorption and adsorption of gaseous pollutants; electrostatic precipitation and filtration of particulate pollutants. Actual case studies. Offered: jointly with CEE 494/CHEM E 468.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 468

M E 469 Applications of Dynamics in Engineering (4) Storti
Application of the principles of dynamics to selected engineering problems, such as suspension systems, gyroscopes, electromechanical devices. Includes introduction to energy methods, Hamilton's principle and Lagrange equations, and the design of dynamic system. Prerequisite: M E 374.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 469

M E 470 Mechanical Vibrations (3) Reinhall
Single-degree-of-freedom linear systems techniques. Matrix techniques for multi-degree-of-freedom linear systems. Applications in vibration isolation, transmission, and absorption problems and instrumentation. Prerequisite: M E 373.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 470

M E 471 Automatic Control (4) Berg
Dynamic system modeling; control system stability and performance analysis; compensator design by Bode and root-locus methods. Prerequisite: M E 374.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 471

M E 473 Instrumentation (4) Garbini
Principles and practice of industrial and laboratory measurement. Dynamics of instrument response; generalized performance analysis of sensor systems; theory of transducers for motion, force, pressure, flow, and other measurements. Lecture and laboratory. Prerequisite: M E 374.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 473

M E 477 Embedded Computing in Mechanical Systems (4) Garbini
Analysis of electromechanical systems employing microcomputers for control or data acquisition. Microcomputer architecture, memory organization, C language programming, interfaces, and communications. Particular emphasis on design of hardware and software interfaces for real-time interaction with mechanical systems. Weekly laboratory. Prerequisite: M E 374.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 477

M E 478 Finite Element Analysis (4) Reinhall
Development of theory and concepts of finite element analysis. Applications in all areas of mechanical engineering, including mechanics of solids, heat transfer, and design of dynamical systems. Weekly computer exercises. Prerequisite: M E 123; M E 374; either MATH 308 or AMATH 352.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 478

M E 480 Introduction to Computer-Aided Technology (4) Ganter
Principles of computer-aided technology. Computer-aided design, engineering, drafting, and manufacturing; computer-aided design systems, geometry, computer graphics, hardware, computer-aided vehicle/system design synthesis. System demonstrations, laboratories, and site visits. Prerequisite: M E 123; AMATH 301.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 480

M E 481 Internal Combustion Engines (4) Kramlich, Malte
Internal combustion engines including spark and compression ignition piston engines, with focus on engine performance and the thermodynamics, combustion, emissions, and efficiency of engines. Impact of greenhouse gas constraints on engines. Prerequisite: either M E 323, A A 260, or CHEM E 325.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 481

M E 485 Introduction to Electronic Packaging and Materials (3) Taya
The governing equations of transport phenomena: mechanical, thermal, and electromagnetic behavior, thermomechanical and electromagnetic properties of packaging materials, electromagnetic characteristics of circuit and transmission lines, thermal management and reliability analysis of packaging, interconnect and material processing technology. Prerequisite: MSE 170. Offered: jointly with MSE 485; AW.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 485

M E 487 Laboratory in Electronic Packaging and Materials (1) Taya, Stoebe
Laboratory course to accompany M E 485 Experiments related to design, processing and reliability of electronic packaging used in consumer electronics. Co-requisite: M E 485. Offered: jointly with MSE 487.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 487

M E 494 Mechatronics Design Preparation (1) Garbini
Design laboratory preparation. Covers the development of functional specifications; exploration of prior art; static and dynamic modeling. Prerequisite: M E 471; M E 473. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 494

M E 495 Mechanical Engineering Design (4) Cooper
Design laboratory involving the identification and synthesis of engineering factors to plan and achieve specific project goals. Current literature and prerequisite texts used as reference sources. Prerequisite: M E 395.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 495

M E 496 Technology-Based Entrepreneurship (3) Furness
Concentrates on hands-on aspects of innovation and entrepreneurial enterprise development. Examines relationships between innovation, iterative prototyping, and marketing testing. Students identify market opportunities, create new technology-based products and services to satisfy customer needs, and construct and test prototypes. Offered: jointly with IND E 496.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 496

M E 498 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering (1-5, max. 6)
Lecture and/or laboratory. Maximum of 6 credits may be applied toward an undergraduate degree.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 498

M E 499 Special Projects (2-5, max. 6)
Written report required.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 499

M E 500 Advanced Composite Structural Analysis (3)
Covers advanced stress analysis methods for composite structures made of beams, laminates, sandwich plates, and thin shells; stress and buckling analyses of solid and thin-walled composite beams; shear deformable theory for bending of thick laminated plates; and stress and fracture mechanics analysis of bonded joints. Prerequisite: A A 532. Offered: jointly with A A 535; Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 500

M E 501 Modern Manufacturing Processes (3) Ramulu
General survey and introduction to modern manufacturing engineering processes. Fundamental principles and practices of modern manufacturing processes. Case studies and exercises relating the course material directly to modern industrial practice. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 501

M E 503 Continuum Mechanics (3)
Reviews concepts of motion, stress, energy for a general continuum; conservation of mass, momentum, and energy; and the second law; constitutive equations for linear/nonlinear elastic, viscous/inviscid fluids, and general materials; and examples/solutions for solid/fluid materials. Offered: jointly with A A 503; A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 503

M E 504 Introduction to Microelectro Mechanical Systems (4)
Theoretical and practical aspects in design, analysis, and fabrication of MEMS devices. Fabrication processes, including bulk and surface micromachining. MEMS design and layout. MEMS CAD tools. Mechanical and electrical design. Applications such as micro sensors and actuators, or chemical and thermal transducers, recent advances. Offered: jointly with E E 502/MSE 504.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 504

M E 505 Computer Integrated Manufacturing (3)
Design and analysis of advanced manufacturing systems from a strategic as well as technological perspective. Focus on information generation, management, and coordination aspects of complex manufacturing organizations. Examination of system integration alternatives and consequences for relationships with customers and suppliers. Prerequisite: IND E 431 or equivalent. Offered: jointly with IND E 531.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 505

M E 507 Fluid Mechanics (3)
Covers inviscid and viscous imcompressible flows, exact solutions of laminar flows, creeping flows, boundary layers, free-shear flows, vorticity equation, and introduction to vortex dynamics. Offered: jointly with A A 507; W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 507

M E 508 Theory and Design for Mechanical Measurements (3)
Fundamental concepts of mechanical measurements, principles of sensors and transducers, signal conditioning and data acquisition, advanced experiment planning and analysis, and applications in mechanical engineering.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 508

M E 510 Mathematical Foundations of Systems Theory (4)
Mathematical foundations for system theory presented from an engineering viewpoint. Includes set theory; functions, inverse functions; metric spaces; finite dimensional linear spaces; linear operators on finite dimensional spaces; projections on Hilbert spaces. Applications to engineering systems stressed. Offered: jointly with A A 510/CHEM E 510/E E 510.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 510

M E 511 Biological Frameworks for Engineers (3) Sniadecki
Introduces the fundamentals of biology for an engineer. Covers mechanisms and biomechanics of DNA, proteins, cells, connective tissue, musculoskeletal tissue, and cardiovascular tissue, integration principles of living systems, structure-function relationships, and techniques to study biology and medicine, and tissue engineering. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 511

M E 515 Life Cycle Assessment (3) Cooper
Presents and discusses the computation structure and data sources for environmental Life Cycle Assessment. Uses Life Cycle Assessment to analyze materials, products, and services. The analysis either identifies opportunities for improvements or selects a superior alternative on the basis of pollution prevention and resource conservation. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 515

M E 520 Seminar (-1, max. 6)
Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 520

M E 521 Thermodynamics (3) Kramlich
Fundamental concepts of temperature, thermodynamic properties, and systems. The first, second, and combined laws. Development of the relations of classical thermodynamics. Introduction to statistical thermodynamics. Prerequisite: M E 323 and graduate standing in mechanical engineering or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 521

M E 522 Thermodynamics (3) Malte
Topics from statistical thermodynamics, including the Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein, and Fermi-Dirac statistics. Solutions of the Schrodinger wave equation and evaluation of the partition function for translation, rotation, and vibration. Prerequisite: M E 521 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 522

M E 523 Energy and Environment Seminar (1, max. 20) Malte
Student discussions of topics in combustion science and technology, alternative fuels, renewable energy, environmental consequences of energy conversion, and design for environment. Also, presentations by outside experts. May be repeated for credit. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 523

M E 524 Combustion (3) Kramlich
Chemical and physical processes of combustion with applications to design of combustors, fuel selection, and consideration of environmental effects. Prerequisite: graduate standing in mechanical engineering or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 524

M E 525 Applied Acoustics I (3) Dahl, Reinhall
Introduces acoustics through various applications such as medical ultrasound, underwater sound, noise control and vibrations. Includes linear acoustics, wave equation, planewave solutions, acoustics scales; reflection, refraction, scattering and diffraction, acoustic sources, radiation form transmission through plates. Prerequisite: graduate standing in Engineering, allied field, or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 525

M E 526 Special Topics in Acoustics (3) Dahl, Reinhall
Advanced study of special topics in acoustics, such as medical ultrasound, underwater sound, noise control and vibrations. Prerequisite: ME 525, or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 526

M E 527 Musculoskeletal Biomechanics (4) R. CHING
Engineering principles and mechanics applied to the musculoskeletal system including structure-function property relationships of musculoskeletal tissues, the biomechanics of joint systems, and applications of biomechanics in industry and research. Offered: jointly with BIOEN 520; W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 527

M E 528 Acoustics of Environmental Noise (4)
Offered: jointly with CEE 554.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 528

M E 529 Advanced Energy Conservation Systems (4) Kramlich
Covers advanced energy conversion systems and technologies, including high efficiency combined cycles, advanced rankine, integrated gasification combined cycle, nuclear, biomass thermal conversion, and fuels cells. Discusses environmental consequences. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 529

M E 530 Radiative Heat Transfer (3) Mescher
Covers black and gray body radiation, radiative material properties, radiation exchange between surfaces, radiation in participating media, and combined radiation with conduction or convection. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 530

M E 531 Conductive Heat Transfer (3)
Analysis of steady-state and transient heat conduction in single- and multidimensional systems by mathematical, graphical, numerical, and analogical methods. Prerequisite: graduate standing in mechanical engineering or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 531

M E 532 Convective Heat Transfer (3) Kramlich
Introduction to fluid flow and boundary-layer theory as applicable to forced- and natural-convection heat transfer. Condensation and boiling heat transfer. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 532

M E 534 Fluid Mechanics II (3) Riley
Review of basic principles, some exact solutions and their interpretation, waves (water waves, sound waves, shock waves), boundary layers, jets and wakes, flow stability, turbulence, applications. Prerequisite: M E 507 or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 534

M E 535 Computational Techniques in Mechanical Engineering (3) Emery
Advanced heat transfer studies of interest to mechanical engineers. Subject coverage varies from year to year. Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 535

M E 536 Micro and Nanoscale Fluid Transport Phenomena (3) Posner, Shen
Focuses on fundamental fluid transport physics at the micro/ and nanometer scale for applications in micro/nanofluidic devices. Presents the core concepts of low-Reynolds number Newtonian fluid mechanics; mass transfer; charged double layers; electrokinetically driven flow and transport; and surface tension. Discusses state of the art micro and nanoscale total analytical devices. Offered: WSp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 536

M E 537 Topics in Fluid Mechanics (3)
Selected fluid mechanics relevant to current advances in research and application. Topics selected vary with faculty and student interest, but have included flow stability, special topics in turbulence, and turbulent reacting flows.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 537

M E 539 Renewable Energy I (4) Malte
Renewable energy, principles and practices of energy conversion, with focus on solar energy and bio-energy. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 539

M E 540 Renewable Energy II (3) Malte
Explores renewable energy, principles and practices of energy conversion, focusing on wind and hydrokinetic energy. Offered: Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 540

M E 541 Fatigue of Materials (3) Ramulu
Macro and micro aspects of fatigue of metals and fatigue mechanisms. Analytical methods for fatigue and life assessment in advanced materials. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 541

M E 543 Fluid Turbulence (3)
Methods of characterizing fluid turbulence; probability concepts; spatial and temporal velocity correlations; spectral energy transfer; turbulent diffusion; isotropic turbulence and Kolmogoroff's hypothesis; Taylor's hypothesis; hot-wire measurement techniques. Prerequisite: 3 credits of graduate level fluid mechanics or permission of instructor. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 543

M E 544 Advanced Turbulence Modeling Techniques (3) Riley
The Reynolds stress transport equations; plane homogeneous shear flow; modeling the pressure-strain, diffusion, and dissipation rate correlation tensors; one and two-equation turbulence models; near-wall turbulence and wall functions; limitations of length scale and eddy viscosity modeling. Prerequisite: 3 credits of turbulence-related coursework. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 544

M E 546 Micro-Scale Heat Transfer (3) Mescher
Covers advanced heat conduction and radiation principles, emphasizing micro-scale applications. Offered: Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 546

M E 547 Linear Systems Theory (4)
Linearity, linearization, finite dimensionality, time-varying vs. time-invariant linear systems, interconnection of linear systems, functional/structural descriptions of linear systems, system zeros and invertibility, linear system stability, system norms, state transition, matrix exponentials, controllability and observability, realization theory. Recommended: either A A 447, E E 447, or M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 547/E E 547.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 547

M E 548 Linear Multivariable Control (3)
Introduction to MIMO systems, successive single loop design comparison, Lyapunov stability theorem, full state feedback controller design, observer design, LQR problem statement, design, stability analysis, and tracking design. LQG design, separation principle, stability robustness. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 548/E E 548.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 548

M E 549 Estimation and System Identification (3)
Fundamentals of state estimation for linear and nonlinear systems. Discrete and continuous systems. Probability and stochastic systems theory. Models with noise. Kalman-Bucy filters, extended Kalman filters, recursive estimation. Numerical issues in filter design and implementation. Prerequisite: either A A 547, E E 547, or M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 549/E E 549.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 549

M E 550 Nonlinear Optimal Control (3)
Calculus of variations for dynamical systems, definition of the dynamic optimization problem, constraints and Lagrange multipliers, the Pontryagin Maximum Principle, necessary conditions for optimality, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation, singular arc problems, computational techniques for solution of the necessary conditions. Recommended: A A 548/E E 548. Offered: jointly with A A 550/E E 550.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 550

M E 551 Elasticity I: Elastostatics (3) Taya
Elastostatics, including general formulations of 2D and 3D elastostatic problems (stress function method, complex variable method, displacement potential method). Eshelby's method is emphasized and used to solve 2D and 3D problems with special application to composite materials. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 551

M E 552 Viscoelasticity and Plasticity (3) Taya
Covers viscoelasticity, including the stress-strain equations in terms of convolution integral, Fourier transform, and Laplace transform modes. Plasticity focuses on generalized plastic behavior.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 552

M E 553 Adhesion Mechanics (3) Tuttle
Introduction to adhesive systems and test/evaluation techniques. Stress/strain analysis methods used with adhesive joints. Examples of practical applications. Prerequisite: graduate student status or permission of instructor. Offered: Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 553

M E 555 Thermoelasticity (3) Emery
Basic equations of thermoelasticity for isotropic elastic solids. Analysis of disks, cylinders, spheres, beams, and plates under steady temperature and sudden and slow heating and cooling. Introduction to thermoelastic stability. Prerequisite: M E 551 or permission of instructor.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 555

M E 556 Experimental Stress Analysis I (3) Tuttle
Theory and practice of experimental techniques including strain gages and strain gage-based devices, thermocouples, LVDTs, and transducer design. Lecture and laboratory. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 556

M E 557 Experimental Stress Analysis II (3) Tuttle
Theory and practice of optical mechanics, including interferometric techniques (moire and holographic), geometric moir methods, and photoelasticity. Lecture and laboratory. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 557

M E 559 Introduction to Fracture Mechanics (3) Ramulu
Applications of linear fracture mechanics to failure analysis and fracture control based on actual case studies. Fracture toughness and fatigue testing techniques, crack initiation, and propagation fatigue life prediction of mechanical components subjected to environmental effects. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 559

M E 561 Mechanics of Thin Films (3) Wang
Provides an overview of the thin film deposition processes; the stress and microstructure development during film growth; the mechanisms of adhesion; delamination and fracture; and the state-of-the-art characterization techniques for the microstructure and mechanical properties of thin films, coatings, and nanomaterials. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 561

M E 562 Introduction to Electronic Composites (3) Taya
Fundamentals of microstructure-macro-property relation of electronic composites. This course covers applications (computers, laser packages, medical devices, MEMS, avionics), functions (mechanical, thermal, electromagnetic, and optical), microstructure-macro-property relations, processing issues, and modeling of electronic composites. Recommended: M E 450 or MSE 475. Offered: jointly with MSE 562; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 562

M E 563 Advanced Composites: Design and Manufacturing (3)
Manufacturing and processing techniques of metal-, polymer-, and ceramic-matrix composites; design considerations related to manufacturing techniques; non-destructive testing of composite structures. Fiber-matrix interfacial features and interactions. Interfacial thermodynamics applied to selection of fiber-matrix combinations. Prerequisite: MSE 475 or M E 450 or equivalent by permission of instructor. Offered: jointly with MSE 563; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 563

M E 564 Mechanical Engineering Analysis (3) Storti
Application of mathematical methods to the description and analysis of systems in mechanical engineering. Analogies in heat transfer, fluid flow, stress distribution, dynamics, and feedback control. Prerequisite: graduate standing in mechanical engineering or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 564

M E 565 Mechanical Engineering Analysis (3) Storti
Applications of vectors, matrices, and partial differential equations to mechanical engineering systems, including computational techniques and analogies. Prerequisite: graduate standing in mechanical engineering or permission of instructor. Offered: W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 565

M E 568 Active and Sensing Materials (3) Taya
Fundamental knowledge of the nano-structure property relations of active and sensing materials, and their devices. Examples of the active and sensing materials include: shape memory alloys (SMAs), ferromagnetic SMAs, ferroelectric, pyroelectric and piezoelectric materials, thermoelectrics, electroactive and conducting polymers, photoactive polymers, photovoltaics, and electrochromic materials. Offered: jointly with MSE 568; Sp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 568

M E 570 Manifolds and Geometry for Systems and Control (3)
Introduction to fundamentals of calculus on manifolds and group theory with applications in robotics and control theory. Topics include: manifolds, tangent spaces and bundles, Lie groups and algebras, coordinate vs. coordinate-free representations. Applications from physics, robotics, and control theory. Offered: jointly with A A 570/E E 570; W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 570

M E 572 Methodologies for Engineering Design: Conceptual Design (3) Kumar
Methodologies particularly useful in the conceptual or preliminary phase of a design. The design process. Impact of formulating independent functional requirements. Physical and functional coupling in design. Case studies in conceptual design of products and processes. Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 572

M E 578 Optimization in System Sciences (3)
Covers convex sets, separation theorems, theorem of alternatives and their applications, convex analysis, convex functions, conjugation, subgradients, convex optimization, duality and applications, linear and semi-definite programming. Linear matrix inequalities, optimization algorithms, applications in system theory and control, bilinear, rank minimization, optimization software. Recommended: A A 547/M E 547/E E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 578/E E 578; W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 578

M E 580 Geometric Methods for Non-Linear Control Systems (3)
Analysis and design of nonlinear control systems focusing on differential geometric methods. Topics include controllability, observability, feedback linearization, invariant distributions, and local coordinate transformations. Emphasis on systems evolving on Lie groups and linearly uncontrollable systems Prerequisite: A A 570/E E 570/M E 570. Offered: jointly with A A 580/E E 580; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 580

M E 581 Digital Control (3) Chizeck
Sampled-data systems, and z-transform. Frequency domain properties. Sampling D/A and A/D conversion. Controller design via discrete-time equivalents, direct methods, state feedback and observers. Quantization effects. LQR control and introduction to LQG optimal control. Prerequisite: E E 548/A A 548/ M E 548. Offered: jointly with A A 581/E E 581; W.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 581

M E 582 Introduction to Discrete Event Systems (3) Berg
Modeling DES with automata and Petri nets. Languages. State estimation and diagnostics. Control specifications. Feedback control. Dealing with uncontrollability and unobservability. Dealing with blocking. Timed automata and Petri nets. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/ M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 582/E E 582; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 582

M E 583 Nonlinear Control Systems (3)
Analysis of nonlinear systems and nonlinear control system design. Phase plane analysis. Lyapunov stability analysis. Describing functions. Feedback linearization. Introduction to variable structure control. Prerequisite: A A 447/E E 447/M E 471. Offered: jointly with A A 583/E E 583.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 583

M E 585 System Identification and Adaptive Control (3)
Theory and methods of system identification and adaptive control. Identification of linear-in-parameter systems, using recursive LS and extended LS methods; model order selection. Indirect and direct adaptive control. Controller synthesis, transient and stability properties. Recommended: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 585/E E 585.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 585

M E 588 Dynamics and Vibrations (3) Shen
Variational techniques, Hamilton's principle, Lagrange's equations applied to dynamics of particles and rigid bodies. Vibration analysis of multi-degree-of-freedom and continuous systems. Prerequisite: graduate standing in engineering or permission of instructor. Offered: A.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 588

M E 589 Vibrations (3) Storti
Study of systems with nonlinear damping and restoring forces excited by deterministic or random inputs. Applications in measurement, testing, and design of mechanical systems. Nonlinear systems are emphasized. Prerequisite: M E 588 or permission of instructor. Offered: W, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 589

M E 591 Robotics and Control Systems Colloquium (1, max. 30)
Colloquium on current topics in robotics and control systems analysis and design. Topics presented by invited speakers as well as on-campus speakers. Emphasis on the cross-disciplinary nature of robotics and control systems. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: jointly with A A 591/CHEM E 591/E E 591.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 591

M E 593 Feedforward Control (3) Devasia
Design feedforward controllers for precision output tracking; inversion-based control of non-minimum-phase systems; effect of plant uncertainty on feedforward control; design of feedforward controllers for applications such as vertical take off and landing aircraft, flexible structures and piezo-actuators. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 593/E E 593; Sp, even years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 593

M E 594 Robust Control (3)
Basic foundations of linear analysis and control theory, model realization and reduction, balanced realization and truncation, stabilization problem, coprime factorizations, Youla parameterization, matrix inequalities, H-infinity and H2 control, KYP lemma, uncertain systems, robust H2, integral quadratic constraints, linear parameter varying synthesis, applications of robust control. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 594/E E 594; Sp, odd years.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 594

M E 597 Networked Dynamics Systems (3)
Provides an overview of graph-theoretic techniques that are instrumental for studying dynamic systems that coordinate their states over a signal-exchange network. Topics include network models, network properties, dynamics over networks, formation control, biological networks, observability, controllability, and performance measures over networks. Prerequisite: A A 547/E E 547/M E 547. Offered: jointly with A A 597/E E 597.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 597

M E 598 Topics in Research (1)
Doctoral seminar. Credit/no-credit only. Offered: AWSp.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 598

M E 599 Special Projects (1-5, max. 9)
Written report required. Prerequisite: permission of department chairperson. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 599

M E 600 Independent Study or Research (*-)
Written report required. Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 600

M E 700 Master's Thesis (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 700

M E 800 Doctoral Dissertation (*-)
Offered: AWSpS.
View course details in MyPlan: M E 800